 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Code Of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(Act No. 5 of 1908) 
An Act to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the procedure of the Courts of Civil Judicature. 
WHEREAS it is expedient to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the procedure of the Courts of Civil 
Judicature; it is hereby enacted as follows:­
PART 
SECTIONS 
TITLE 
1-8 
PRELIMINARY 
I 
9-35 
SUITS IN GENERAL 
II 
36-74 
EXECUTION 
III 
75-78 
INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS 
IV 
79-88 
SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES 
V 
89-93 
SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS 
VI 
94-95 
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS 
VII 
96-112 
APPEALS 
VIII 
113-115 
REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION 
IX 
116-120 
SPECIAL PROVISION RELATING TO THE HIGH COURTS NOT BEING THE COURT OF A 
JUDICIAL COMMISSIONER 
X 
121-131 
RULES 
XI 
132-158 
MISCELLANEOUS 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, commencement and extent- (1) This Act may be cited as the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
(2) It shall come into force on the first day of January, 1909. 
[2][(3) It extends to the whole of India except­
(a) the State of Jammu and Kashmir; 
(b) the State of Nagaland and the tribal areas : 
Provided that the State Government concerned may, by notification in the Official Gazette, extend the 
provisions of this Code or any of them to the whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, as 
the case may be, with such supplemental, incidental or consequential modifications as may be specified in 
the notification. 
Explanation-In this clause, "tribal areas" means the territories which, immediately before the 21st day of 
January, 1972 were included in the tribal areas of Assam as referred to in paragraph 20 of the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution. 
(4) In relation to the Amindivi Islands, and the East Godavari, West Godavari and Visakhapatnam Agencies 
in the State of Andhra Pradesh and the Union territory of Lakshadweep, the application of this Code shall be 
without prejudice to the application of any rule or regulation for the time being in force in such Islands, 
Agencies or such Union territory, as the case may be, relating to the application of this Code.] 
2. Definitions- In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,­
(1) "Code" includes rules; 
(2) "decree" means the formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as regards the Court expressing it, 
conclusively determines the rights of the parties with regard to all or any of the matters in controversy in the 
suit and may be either preliminary or final. It shall be deemed to include the rejection of a plaint and the 
determination of any question within [3]* * * section 144, but shall not include­
(a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an order, or 
(b) any order of dismissal for default. 
1

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Explanation-A decree is preliminary when further proceedings have to be taken before the suit can be 
completely disposed of. It is final when such adjudication completely disposes of the suit, it may be partly 
preliminary and partly final; 
(3) "decree-holder" means any person in whose favour a decree has been passed or an order capable of 
execution has been made; 
(4) "district" means the local limits of the jurisdiction of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction 
(hereinafter called a "District Court"), and includes the local limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of a 
High Court; 
(5) "foreign Court" means a Court situate outside India and not established or continued by the authority of 
the Central Government; 
(6) "foreign judgment" means the judgment of a foreign Court; 
(7) "Government Pleader" includes any officer appointed by the State Government to perform all or any of 
the functions expressly imposed by this Code on the Government Pleader and also any pleader acting under 
the directions of the Government Pleader; 
(7A) "High Court" in relation to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, means the High Court in Calcutta; 
(7B) "India", except in sections 1, 29, 43, 44, 44A, 78, 79, 82, 83 and 87A, means the territory of India 
excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir; 
(8) "Judge" means the presiding officer of a Civil Court; 
(9) "judgment" means the statement given by the judge of the grounds of a decree or order; 
(10) "judgment-debtor" means any person against whom a decree has been passed or an order capable of 
execution has been made; 
(11) "legal representative" means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased person, and 
includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased and where a party sues or is sued in 
a representative character the person on whom the estate devolves on the death of the party so suing or 
sued; 
(12) "means profits" of property means those profits which the person in wrongful possession of such 
property actually received or might with ordinary diligence have received therefrom, together with interest on 
such profits, but shall not include profits due to improvements made but the person in wrongful possession; 
(13) "movable property" includes growing crops; 
(14) "order" means the formal expression of any decision of a Civil Court which is not a decree; 
(15) "pleader" means any person entitled to appear and plead for another in Court, and includes an 
advocate, a vakil and an attorney of a High Court; 
(16) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules : 
(17) "public officer" means a person falling under any of the following descriptions, namely:­
(a) every Judge; 
(b) every member of [4][an All-India Service]; 
(c) every commissioned or gazetted officer in the military, naval or air forces of the Union while serving under 
the Government. 
(d) every officer of a Court of Justice whose duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter 
of law or fact, or to make, authenticate or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any property, 
or to execute any judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or to preserve order, in the court, 
and every person especially authorized by a Court of Justice to perform any of such duties: 
(e) every person who holds and office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep any person in 
confinement; 
2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(f) every officer of the Government whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences to give information of 
offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, safety or convenience; 
(g) every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property on behalf of 
the Government, or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of the Government, or to execute 
any revenue process, or to investigate, or to report on, any matter affecting the pecuniary interests of the 
Government, or to make, authenticate or keep any document relating to the pecuniary interests of the 
Government, or to prevent the infraction of any law for the protection of the pecuniary interests of the 
Government; and 
(h) every officer in the service or pay of the Government, or remunerated by fees or commission for the 
performance of any public duty; 
(18) "rules" means rules and forms contained in the First Schedule or made under section 122 or section 
125; 
(19) "share in a corporation" shall be deemed to include stock, debenture stock, debentures or bonds; and 
(20) "signed", save in the case of a judgment or decree, includes stamped. 
3. Subordination of Courts- For the purposes of this Code, the District Court is subordinate to the High Court, 
and every Civil Court of a grade inferior to that of a District Court and every Court of Small Causes is 
subordinate to the High Court and District Court. 
4. Savings- (1) In the absence of any specific provision to the contrary, nothing in this Code shall be deemed 
to limit or otherwise affect any special or local law now in force or any special jurisdiction or power conferred, 
or any special form of procedure prescribed, by or under any other law for the time in force. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the proposition contained in sub-section (1) nothing 
in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any remedy which a landholder or landlord may 
have under any law for the time being in force for the recovery of rent of agricultural land from the produce of 
such land. 
5. Application of the Code of Revenue Courts- (1) Where any Revenue Courts are governed by the 
provisions of this Code in those matters of procedure upon which any special enactment applicable to them 
is silent, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any portions of those 
provisions which are not expressly made applicable by this Code shall not apply to those Courts, or shall 
only apply to them with such modifications as the State Government may prescribe. 
(2) "Revenue Court" in sub-section (1) means a Court having jurisdiction under any local law to entertain 
suits or other proceedings relating to the rent, revenue or profits of land used for agricultural purposes, but 
does not include a Civil Court having original jurisdiction under this Code to try such suits or proceedings as 
being suits or proceedings of a civil nature. 
6. Pecuniary jurisdiction- Save in so far as is otherwise expressly provided, nothing herein contained shall 
operate to give any Court jurisdiction over suits the amount or value of the subject-matter of which exceeds 
the pecuniary limits (if any) of its ordinary jurisdiction. 
7. Provincial Small Cause Courts- The following provisions shall not extend to Courts constituted under the 
Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887) or under the Berar Small Cause Courts Laws, 1905, or 
to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes under the said Act or Law or to Courts in any 
part of India to which the said Act does not extend exercising a corresponding jurisdiction that is to say,­
(a) so much of the body of the Code as relates to­
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes; 
(ii) the execution of decrees in such suits; 
(iii) the execution of decrees against immovable property ; and 
(b) the following sections, that is to say,­
section 9, 
sections 91 and 92, 
3

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
sections 94 and 95 so far as they authorize or relate to­
(i) orders for the attachment of immovable property; 
(ii) injunctions, 
(iii) the appointment of a receiver of immovable property, or 
(iv) the interlocutory orders referred to in clause (e) of section 94 and sections 96 to 112 and 115. 
8. Presidency Small Cause Courts- Save as provided in sections 24, 38 to 41, 75, clauses (a), (b) and (c), 76 
[5][77, 157 and 158], and by the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882, (15 of 1882) the provisions in the 
body of this Code shall not extend to any suit or proceedings in any Court of Small Causes established in the 
towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay : 
Provided that ­
(1) the High Courts of Judicature at Fort William Madras and Bombay, as the case may be, may from time to 
time, by notifications in the Official Gazette, direct that any such provisions not inconsistent with the express 
provisions of the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882, (15 of 1882) and with such modifications and 
adaptation as may be specified in the notification, shall extend to suits or proceedings or any class of suits or 
proceedings in such Court: 
(2) all rules heretofore made by any of the said High Courts under section 9 of the Presidency Small Cause 
Courts Act, 1882 ( 15 of 1882) shall be deemed to have been validly made. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Gujarat- After the words Calcutta, Madras and Bombay the words "and in the City of Ahmedabad" shall be 
inserted. 
[Gujarat Act No. XIX of 1961]. 
PART I-SUITS IN GENERAL 
Jurisdiction of the Courts and Res judicata 
9. Courts to try all civil suits unless barred— The Courts shall (subject to the provisions herein contained) have 
jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature excepting suits of which their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly 
barred. 
[6] [Explanation I].—A suit in which the right to property or to an office is contested is a suit of a civil nature, 
notwithstanding that such right may depend entirely on the decision of questions as to religious rites or ceremonies. 
[7] [Explanation II]. For the purposes of this section, it is immaterial whether or not any fees are attached to the office 
referred to in Explanation I or whether or not such office is attached to a particular place.]. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Maharashtra— After section 9 insert the following section 9A. 
"9A. Where at the hearing of application relating to interim relief in a suit, objection to jurisdiction is taken such issue 
to be decided by the court as a preliminary issue:— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this code or any other 
law for the time being in force, if at the hearing of any application for granting or setting aside an order granting any 
interim relief, whether by way of stay, injunction, appointment of a receiver or otherwise, made in any suit, on objection 
to jurisdiction of the court to entertain such suit is taken by any of the parties to the suit the court shall proceed to 
determine at the hearing of such application the issue as to the jurisdiction as a preliminary issue before granting for 
setting aside the order granting the interim relief. Any such application shall be heard and disposed of by the court as 
expeditiously as possible and shall not in any case be adjourned to the hearing of the suit. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), at the hearing of any such application the court may grant 
such interim relief as it may consider necessary, pending determination by it of the preliminary issue as to the 
jurisdiction". 
[Maharashtra Act No. 65 of 1977]. 
4

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
10. Stay of suit— No Court shall proceed with the trial of any suit in which the matter in issue is also directly and 
substantially in issue in a previously instituted suit between the same parties, or between parties under whom they or 
any of them claim litigating under the same title where such suit is pending in the same or any other Court in India 
having jurisdiction to grant the relief claimed, or in any Court beyond the limits of India established or continued by the 
Central Government and having like jurisdiction, or before the Supreme Court. 
Explanation—The pendency of a suit in a foreign Court does not preclude the Courts in India from trying a suit founded 
on the same cause of action. 
11. Res judicata— No Court shall try any suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially in issue has been 
directly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties, or between parties under whom they or any 
of them claim, litigating under the same title, in a Court competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such 
issue has been subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally decided by such Court. 
Explanation I.—The expression "former suit" shall denote a suit which has been decided prior to the suit in question 
whether or not it was instituted prior thereto. 
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section, the competence of a Court shall be determined irrespective of any 
provisions as to a right of appeal from the decision of such Court. 
Explanation III.—The matter above referred to must in the former suit have been alleged by one party and either denied 
or admitted, expressly or impliedly, by the other. 
Explanation IV.—Any matter which might and ought to have been made ground of defence or attack in such former suit 
shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantially in issue in such suit. 
Explanation V.—Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not expressly granted by the decree, shall, for the purposes of 
this section, be deemed to have been refused. 
Explanation VI.—Where persons litigate bona fide in respect of public right or of a private right claimed in common for 
themselves and others, all persons interested in such right shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to claim 
under the persons so litigating. 
[8] [Explanation VII.—The provisions of this section shall apply to a proceeding for the execution of a decree and 
reference in this section to any suit, issue or former suit shall be construed as references, respectively, to proceedings for 
the execution of the decree, question arising in such proceeding and a former proceeding for the execution of that 
decree. 
Explanation VIII.—An issue heard and finally decided by a Court of limited jurisdiction, competent to decide such 
issue, shall operate as res judicata in as subsequent suit, notwithstanding that such Court of limited jurisdiction was not 
competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been subsequently raised.] 
12. Bar to further suit.— Where a plaintiff is precluded by rules from instituting a further suit in respect of any 
particular cause of action, he shall not be entitled to institute a suit in respect of such cause of action in any Court to 
which this Code applies. 
13. When foreign judgment not conclusive— A foreign judgment shall be conclusive as to any matter thereby directly 
adjudicated upon between the same parties or between parties under whom they or any of them claim litigating under 
the same title except— 
(a) where it has not been pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction; 
(b) where it has not been given on the merits of the case; 
(c) where it appears on the face of the proceedings to be founded on an incorrect view of international law or a refusal to 
recognise the law of India in cases in which such law is applicable; 
(d) where the proceedings in which the judgment was obtained are opposed to natural justice; 
(e) where it has been obtained by fraud; 
(f) where it sustains a claim founded on a breach of any law in force in India. 
14. Presumption as to foreign judgments.— The Court shall presume upon the production of any document purporting 
to be a certified copy of a foreign judgment that such judgment was pronounced by a Court of competent jurisdiction, 
unless the contrary appears on the record; but such presumption may be displaced by proving want of jurisdiction. 
5

 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Place of suing 
15. Court in which suits to be instituted— Every suit shall be instituted in the Court of the lowest grade competent to try 
it. 
16. Suits to be instituted where subject-matter situate— Subject to the pecuniary or other limitations prescribed by any 
law, suits— 
(a) for the recovery of immovable property with or without rent or profits, 
(b) for the partition of immovable property, 
(c) for foreclosure, sale or redemption in the case of a mortgage of or charge upon immovable property, 
(d) for the determination of any other right to or interest in immovable property, 
(e) for compensation for wrong to immovable property, 
(f) for the recovery of movable property actually under distraint or attachment, 
shall be instituted in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate: 
Provided that a suit to obtain relief respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property held by or on behalf 
of the defendant, may where the relief sought can be entirely obtained through his personal obedience be instituted 
either in the Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the property is situate, or in the Court within the local 
limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant actually and voluntarily resider, or carries on business, or personally works 
for gain. 
Explanation.— In this section "property" means property situate in India. 
17. Suits for immovable property situate within jurisdiction of different Courts— Where a suit is to obtain relief 
respecting, or compensation for wrong to, immovable property situate within the jurisdiction of different Court, the suit 
my be instituted in any Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any portion of the property is situate : 
Provided that, in respect of the value of the subject matter of the suit, the entire claim is cognizable by such Court. 
18. Place of institution of suit where local limits of jurisdiction of Courts are uncertain— (1) Where it is alleged to be 
uncertain within the local limits of the jurisdiction of which of two or more Courts any immovable property is situate, 
any one of those Courts may, if satisfied that there is ground for the alleged uncertainty, record a statement to that effect 
and thereupon proceed to entertain and dispose of any suit relating to that property, and its decree in the suit shall have 
the same effect as if the property were situate within the local limits of its jurisdiction : 
Provided that the suit is one with respect to which the Court is competent as regards the nature and value of the suit to 
exercise jurisdiction. 
(2) Where a statement has not been recorded under sub-section (1), and objection is taken before an Appellate or 
Revisional Court that a decree or order in a suit relating to such property was made by a Court not having jurisdiction 
where the property is situate, the Appellate or Revisional Court shall not allow the objection unless in its opinion there 
was, at the time of the institution of the suit, no reasonable ground for uncertainty as to the Court having jurisdiction 
with respect thereto and there has been a consequent failure of justice. 
19. Suits for compensation for wrongs to person or movable— Where a suit is for compensation for wrong done to the 
person or to movable property, if the wrong was done within the local limits of the jurisdiction of one Court and the 
defendant resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, within the local limits of the jurisdiction of 
another Court, the suit may be instituted at the option of the plaintiff in either of the said Courts. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, residing in Delhi, beats B in Calcutta. B may sue A either in Calcutta or in Delhi. 
(b) A, residing in Delhi, publishes in Calcutta statements defamatory of B. B may sue A either in Calcutta or in Delhi. 
20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside or cause of action arises— Subject to the limitations aforesaid, 
every suit shall be instituted in Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction— 
(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants where there are more than one, at the time of the commencement of the suit, 
actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain; or 
6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time of the commencement of the suit actually and 
voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, provided that in such case either the leave of the 
Court is given, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry on business, or personally work for gain, as aforesaid, 
acquiesce in such institution; or 
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises. 
[9] [* * * *] 
[10] [Explanation].—A corporation shall be deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office in India or, in 
respect of any cause of action arising at any place where it has also a subordinate office, at such place. 
Illustrations 
(a) A is a tradesman in Calcutta, B carries on business in Delhi. B, by his agent in Calcutta, buys goods of A and 
requests A to deliver them to the East Indian Railway Company. A delivers the goods accordingly in Calcutta. A may 
sue B for the price of the goods either in Calcutta, where the cause of action has arisen or in Delhi, where B carries on 
business. 
(b) A resides at Simla, B at Calcutta and C at Delhi A, B and C being together at Benaras, B and C make a joint 
promissory note payable on demand, and deliver it to A. A may sue B and C at Benaras, where the cause of action 
arose. He may also sue them at Calcutta, where B resides, or at Delhi, where C resides; but in each of these cases, if the 
non-resident defendant object, the suit cannot proceed without the leave of the Court. 
21. Objections to jurisdiction— [11][(1)] No objection as to the place of suing shall be allowed by any appellate or 
Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the earliest possible opportunity and in 
all cases where issues or settled at or before such settlement, and unless there has been a consequent failure of justice. 
[12] [2) No objection as to the competence of a Court with reference to the pecuniary limits of its jurisdiction shall be 
allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the Court of first instance at the 
earliest possible opportunity, and in all cases where issues are settled, at or before such settlement, and unless there has 
been a consequent failure of justice. 
(3) No objection as to the competence of the executing Court with reference to the local limits of its jurisdiction shall be 
allowed by any Appellate or Revisional Court unless such objection was taken in the executing Court at the earliest 
possible opportunity, and unless there has been a consequent failure of justice.] 
[13][21A. Bar on suit to set aside decree on objection as to place of suing— No suit shall lie challenging the validity of 
a decree passed in a former suit between the same parties, or between the parties under whom they or any of them 
claim, litigating under the same title, on any ground based on an objection as to the place of suing. 
Explanation.—The expression "former suit" means a suit which has been decided prior to the decision in the suit in 
which the validity of the decree is questioned, whether or not the previously decided suit was instituted prior to the suit 
in which the validity of such decree is questioned]. 
22. Power to transfer suits which may be instituted in more than one Court— Where a suit may be instituted in any one 
of two or more Courts and is instituted in one of such Courts, any defendant, after notice to the other parties, may, at the 
earliest possible opportunity and in all cases where issues are settled at or before such settlement, apply to have the suit 
transferred to another Court, and the Court to which such application is made, after considering the objections of the 
other parties (if any), shall determine in which of the several Courts having jurisdiction the suit shall proceed. 
23. To what Court application lies.— (1) Where the several Courts having jurisdiction are subordinate to the same 
Appellate Court, an application under section 22 shall be made to the Appellate Court. 
(2) Where such Courts are subordinate to different Appellate Courts but to the same High Court, the application shall be 
made to the said High Court. 
(3) Where such Courts are subordinate to different High Courts, the application shall be made the High Court within the 
local limits of whose jurisdiction the Court in which the suit is brought is situate. 
24. General power of transfer and withdrawal— (1) On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the 
parties and after hearing such of them as desired to be heard, or of its own motion without such notice, the High Court 
or the District Court may at any stage— 
7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) transfer any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending before it for trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it and 
competent to try or dispose of the same, or 
(b) withdraw any suit, appeal or other proceeding pending in any Court subordinate to it, and— 
(i) try or dispose of the same; or 
(ii) transfer the same for trial or disposal to any Court subordinate to it and competent to try or dispose of the same; or 
(iii) retransfer the same for trial or disposal to the Court from which it was withdrawn 
(2) Where any suit or proceeding has been transferred or withdrawn under sub-section (1), the Court which [14][is 
thereafter to try or dispose of such suit or proceeding] may, subject to any special directions in the case of any order of 
transfer, either retry it or proceed from the point at which it was transferred or withdrawn. 
[15] [(3) For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) Courts of Additional and Assistant Judges shall be deemed to be subordinate to the District Court; 
(b) "proceeding" includes a proceeding for the execution of a decree or order.] 
(4) the Court trying any suit transferred or withdrawn under this section from a Court of Small Causes shall, for the 
purposes of such suit, be deemed to be a Court of Small Causes. 
[16] [(5) A suit or proceeding may be transferred under this section from a Court which has no jurisdiction to try it.] 
[17][25. Power of Supreme Court to transfer suits, etc.— (1) On the application of a party, and after notice to the 
parties, and after hearing such of them as desire to be heard, the Supreme Court may, at any stage, if satisfied that an 
order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, direct that any suit, appeal or other proceeding be 
transferred from a High Court or other Civil Court in one State to a High Court or other Civil Court in any other State. 
(2) Every application under this section shall be made by a motion which shall be supported by an affidavit. 
(3) The Court to which such suit, appeal or other proceeding is transferred shall, subject to any special directions in the 
order of transfer, either retry it or proceed from the stage at which it was transferred to it. 
(4) In dismissing any application under this section, the Supreme Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was 
frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person who has opposed the 
application such sum, not exceeding two thousand rupees, as it considers appropriate in the circumstances of the case. 
(5) The law applicable to any suit, appeal or other proceeding transferred under this section shall be the law which the 
Court in which the suit, appeal or other proceeding was originally instituted ought to have applied to such suit, appeal or 
proceeding.] 
Institution of suits 
26. Institution of suits— Every suit shall be instituted by the presentation of a plaint or in such other manner as may be 
prescribed. 
Summons and Discovery 
27. Summons to defendants— Where a suit has been duly instituted, a summons may be issued to the defendant to 
appear and answer the claim and may be served in manner prescribed. 
28. Service of summons where defendant resides in another State— (1) A summons may be sent for service in another 
State to such Court and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that State. 
(2) The Court to which such summons is sent shall, upon receipt thereof, proceed as if it had been issued by such Court 
and shall then return the summons to the Court of issue together with the record (if any) of its proceedings with regard 
thereto. 
[18] [(3) Where the language of the summons sent for service in another State is different from the language of the 
record referred to in sub- section (2), a translation of the record,— 
(a) in Hindi, where the language of the Court issuing the summons is Hindi, or 
(b) in Hindi or English where the language of such record is other than Hindi or English, 
8

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
shall also be sent together with the record sent under that sub-section]. 
29. Service of foreign summonses— Summons and other processes issued by— 
(a) any Civil or Revenue Court established in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extent, or 
(b) any Civil or Revenue Court established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India, or 
(c) any other Civil or Revenue Court outside India to which the Central Government has, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, declared the provisions of this section to apply, 
may be sent to the Courts in the territories to which this Code extends, and served as if they were summonses issued by 
such Courts. 
30. Power to order discovery and the like— Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Court 
may, at any time, either of its own motion or on the application of any party,— 
(a) make such orders as may be necessary or reasonable in all matters relating to the delivery and answering of 
interrogatories, the admission of documents and facts, and the discovery, inspection, production, impounding and return 
of documents or other material objects producible as evidence; 
(b) issue summonses to persons whose attendance is required either to give evidence or to produce documents or such 
other objects as aforesaid; 
(c) order any fact to be proved by affidavit. 
31. Summons to witness— The provisions in sections 27, 28 and 29 shall apply to summonses to give evidence or to 
produce documents or other material objects. 
32. Penalty for default —The Court may compel the attendance of any person to whom a summons has been issued 
under section 30 and for that purpose may— 
(a) issue a warrant for his arrest; 
(b) attach and sell his property; 
(c) impose a fine upon him not exceeding five hundred rupees; 
(d) order him to furnish security for his appearance and in default commit him to the civil prison. 
Judgment and decree 
33. Judgment and decree— The Court, after the case has been heard, shall pronounce judgment, and on such judgment a 
decree shall follow. 
Interest 
34. Interest— (1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of money, the Court may, in the decree, order 
interest at such rate as the Court deems reasonable to be paid on the principal sum adjudged, from the date of the suit to 
the date of the decree, in addition to any interest adjudged on such principal sum for any period prior to the institution of 
the suit, with further interest at such rate not exceeding six per cent, per annum as the Court deems reasonable on such 
principal sum from the date of the decree to the date of payment, or to such earlier date as the Court thinks fit : 
[19] [Provided that where the liability in relation to the sum so adjudged had arisen out of a commercial transaction, the 
rate of such further interest may exceed six per cent, per annum, but shall not exceed the contractual rate of interest or 
where there is no contractual rate, the rate at which moneys are lent or advanced by nationalised banks in relation to 
commercial transactions. 
Explanation I.—In this sub-section, "nationalised bank" means a corresponding new bank as defined in the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act 1970 (5 of 1970). 
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section, a transaction is a commercial transaction, if it is connected with the 
industry, trade or business of the party incurring the liability.] 
(2) Where such a decree is silent with respect to the payment of further interest on such principal sum from the date of 
the decree to the date of payment or other earlier date, the Court shall be deemed to have refused such interest, and a 
separate suit therefore shall not lie. 
9

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Costs 
35. Costs— (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, and to the provisions of law for the 
time being in force, the costs of and incident to all suits shall be in the discretion of the Court, and the Court shall have 
full power to determine by whom or out of what property and to what extent such costs are to be paid, and to give all 
necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid. The fact that the Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit shall be no bar 
to the exercise of such powers. 
(2) Where the Court directs that any costs shall not follow the event, the Court shall state its reasons in writing. 
35A. Compensatory costs in respect of false or vexatious claims or defenses— (1) If any suit or other proceedings 
including an execution proceedings but [20][excluding an appeal or a revision] any party objects to the claim of defence 
on the ground that the claim or defence or any part of it is, as against the objector, false or vexatious to the knowledge 
of the party by whom it has been put forward, and if thereafter, as against the objector, such claim or defence is 
disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole or in part, the Court if it so thinks fit, may, after recording its reasons for 
holding such claim or defence to be false or vexatious, make an order for the payment to the object or by the party by 
whom such claim or defence has been put forward, of cost by way of compensation. 
(2) No Court shall make any such order for the payment of an amount exceeding [21][three thousand rupees] or 
exceeding the limits of it pecuniary jurisdiction, whichever amount is less: 
Provided that where the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of any Court exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small 
Causes under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887) or under a corresponding law in force in any part 
of India to which the said Act does not extend and not being a Court constituted under such Act or law, are less than two 
hundred and fifty rupees, the High Court may empower such Court to award as costs under this section any amount not 
exceeding two hundred and fifty rupees and not exceeding those limits by more than one hundred rupees : 
Provided, further, that the High Court may limit the amount or class of Courts is empowered to award as costs under 
this Section. 
(3) No person against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by reason thereof, be exempted from any 
criminal liability in respect of any claim or defence made by him. 
(4) The amount of any compensation awarded under this section in respect of a false or vexatious claim or defence shall 
be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages or compensation in respect of such claim or defence. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— (i) For sub-section (1) of section 35A substitute the following. 
"(1) If any suit or other proceedings including proceedings in execution, but not being an appeal or revision, the court 
finds that the claim or defence or any part thereof is false or vaxatious to the knowledge of the party by whom it has 
been put forward and if such claim or defence or such part is disallowed, abandoned or withdrawn in whole or in part, 
the court may, after recording its reasons for holding such claim or defence to be false or vexatious, make an order for 
the payment to the successful party or costs by way of compensation irrespective of the decisions on other issues in the 
case". 
[U.P. Act No. 24 of 1954]. 
(ii) After sub-section (1) insert the following. 
"(1-A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall mutatis mutandis apply to an appeal where the appellate Court confirms 
the decision of the trial court and the trial court has not awarded or insufficient, compensatory cost under that sub­
section. 
[U.P. Act No. 57 of 1976]. 
[22][35B. Costs for causing delay— (1) If, on any date fixed for the hearing of a suit or for taking any step therein, a 
party to the suit— 
(a) fails to take the step which he was required by or under this Code to take on that date, or 
(b) obtains an adjournment for taking such step or for producing evidence or on any other ground, 
the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order requiring such party to pay to the other party such costs as 
would, in the opinion of the Court, be reasonably sufficient to reimburse the other party in respect of the expenses 
10

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
incurred by him in attending the Court on that date, and payment of such costs, on the date next following the date of 
such order, shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution of— 
(a) the suit by the plaintiff, where the plaintiff was ordered to pay such costs. 
(b) the defence by the defendant, where the defendant was ordered to pay such costs. 
Explanation.—Where separate defences have been raised by the defendants or groups of defendants, payment of such 
costs shall be a condition precedent to the further prosecution of the defence by such defendants or groups of defendants 
as have been ordered by the Court to pay such costs. 
(2) The costs, ordered to be paid under sub-section (1) shall not, if paid, be included in the costs awarded in the decree 
passed in the suit; but, if such costs are not paid, a separate order shall be drawn up indicating the amount of such costs 
and the names and addresses of the persons by whom such costs are payable and the order so drawn up shall be 
executable against such persons.] 
PART II- EXECUTION 
General 
[23][36. Application to orders— The provisions of this Code relating to the execution of decree (including provisions 
relating to payment under a decree) shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply to the execution of orders 
(including payment an order).] 
37. Definition of Court which passed a decree— The expression "Court which passed a decree", or words to that effect, 
shall, in relation to the execution of decrees, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context, be deemed to 
include,— 
(a) where the decree to be executed has been passed in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction, the Court of first instance, 
and 
(b) where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or to have jurisdiction to execute it, the Court which, if the suit 
wherein the decree was passed was instituted at the time of making the application for the execution of the decree, 
would have jurisdiction to try such suit. 
[24] [Explanation.—The Court of first instance does not cease to have jurisdiction to execute a decree merely on the 
ground that after the institution of the suit wherein the decree was passed or after the passing of the decree, any area has 
been transferred from the jurisdiction of that Court to the jurisdiction of any other Court; but in every such case, such 
other Court shall also have jurisdiction to execute the decree, if at the time of amking the application for execution of 
the decree it would have jurisdiction to try the said suit.] 
Courts by which decrees may be executed 
38. Court by which decree may be executed— A decree may be executed either by the court which passed it, or by the 
Court to which it is sent for execution. 
39. Transfer of decree— (1) The Court which passed a decree may, on the application of the decree-holder, send it for 
execution to another Court [25][of competent jurisdiction],— 
(a) if the person against whom the decree is passed actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business, or personally 
works for gain, within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such other Court, or 
(b) if such person has not property with in the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court which passed the decree 
sufficient to satisfy such decree and has property within the local limits of the jurisdiction of such other Court, or 
(c) if the decree directs the sale or delivery of immovable property situate outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of 
the Court which passed it, or 
(d) if the Court which passed the decree considers for any other reason, which it shall record in wiring, that the decree 
should be executed by such other Court. 
(2) The Court which passed the decree may of its own motion send it for execution to any subordinate Court of 
competent jurisdiction. 
11

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
[26][(3) For the purposes of this section, a Court shall be deemed to be a Court of competent jurisdiction if, at the time 
of making the application for the transfer of decree to it, such Court would have jurisdiction to try the suit in which such 
decree was passed.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— Sub-section (3) of section 39 shall be substituted. 
"(3) For the purpose of this section, a court shall be deemed to be a court of competent jurisdiction if the amount or 
value of the subject matter of the suit wherein the decree was passed does not exceed the pecuniary limits if any of its 
ordinary jurisdiction at the time of making the application for the transfer of decree to it, notwithstanding that it had 
otherwise no jurisdiction to try the suit". 
[U.P. Act No. 31 of 1978]. 
40. Transfer of decree to Court in another State— Where a decree is sent for execution in another State, it shall be sent 
to such Court and executed in such manner as may be prescribed by rules in force in that State. 
41. Result of execution proceedings to be certified.— The Court to which a decree is sent for execution shall certify to 
the Court which passed it the fact of such execution, or where the former Court fails to execute the same the 
circumstances attending such failure. 
42. Powers of Court in executing transferred decree— [27][(1)] The Court executing a decree sent to it shall have the 
same powers in executing such decree as if it had been passed by itself. All persons disobeying or obstructing the 
execution of the decree shall be punishable by such Court in the same manner as if it had passed the decree. And its 
order in executing such decree shall be subject to the same rules in respect of appeal as if the decree had been passed by 
itself. 
[28][(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the powers of the Court under that sub­
section shall include the following powers of the Court passed the decree, namely:— 
(a) power to send the decree for execution to another Court under section 39; 
(b) power to execute the decree against the legal representative of the deceased judgment-debtor under section 50; 
(c) power to order attachment of a decree. 
(3) A Court passing an order in exercise of the powers specified in sub-section (2) shall send a copy thereof to the Court 
which passed the decree. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer on the Courts to which a decree is sent for execution any of the 
following powers, namely— 
(a) power to order execution at the instance of the transferee of the decree; 
(b) in the case of a decree passed against a firm, power to grant leave to execute such decree against any person other 
than such a person as is referred to in clause (b), or clause (c), of sub-rule (1) of rule 50 of Order XXI.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— Section 42 shall be substituted by following. 
"42. Power of Court in executing transferred decree:— (1) The court executing a decree sent to it shall have the same 
powers in executing such decree as if it had been passed by itself. All persons disobeying or obstructing the decree shall 
be punishable by such court in the same manner as if it had passed the decree, and its order in executing such decree 
shall be subject to the same rules in respect of appeal as if the decree had been passed by itself. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1) the powers of the court under that sub-section 
shall include the following powers of the court which passed the decree, namely— 
(a) power to send the decree for execution to another court under section 39. 
(b) power to execute the decree against the legal representative of the deceased judgment debtor under section 50. 
(c) power to order attachment of a decree. 
(d) power to decide any question relating to the bar of limitation to the executability of the decree. 
12

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(e) power to record payment or adjustment under Rule 2 of order XXI. 
(f) power to order stay of execution under Rule 29 Order XXI, 
(g) in the case of a decree passed against a firm power to grant leave to execute such decree against any person other 
than a person as is referred to in clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 50 of Order XXI. 
(3) A court passing an order in exercise of the powers specified in sub-section (2) shall send a copy there of to the court 
which passed the decree. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to confer on the court to which a decree is sent for execution, the power to 
order execution at the instance of the transfer of a decree" 
[U.P. Act No. 14 of 1970]. 
43. Execution of decrees passed by Civil Courts in places to which this Code does not extend— Any decree passed by 
any Civil Court established in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend, or by any Court 
established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India, may, if it cannot be executed within 
the jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, be executed in the manner herein provided within the jurisdiction 
of any Court in the territories to which this Code extends. 
44. Execution of decrees passed by Revenue Court in places to which this Code does not extend.— The State 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the decrees of any Revenue Court in any part of 
India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend or any class of such decrees, may be executed in the State as if 
they had been passed by Courts in that State. 
44A. Execution of decrees passed by Courts in reciprocating territory— (1) Where a certified copy of decree of any of 
the superior Courts of any reciprocating territory has been filed in a District Court, the decree may be executed in India 
as if it had been passed by the District Court. 
(2) Together with the certified copy of the decree shall be filed a certificate from such superior Court stating the extent, 
if any, to which the decree has been satisfied or adjusted and such certificate shall, for the purposes of proceedings 
under this section, be conclusive proof of the extent of such satisfaction or adjustment. 
(3) The provisions of section 47 shall as from the filing of the certified copy of the decree apply to the proceedings of a 
District Court executing a decree under this section, and the District Court shall refuse execution of any such decree, if 
it is shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the decree falls within any of the exceptions specified in clauses (a) to (f) 
of section 13. 
Explanation 1— "Reciprocating territory" means any country or territory outside India which the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a reciprocating territory for the purposes of this section; and 
"superior Courts", with reference to any such territory, means such Courts as may be specified in the said notification. 
Explanation 2.— "Decree" with reference to a superior Court means any decree or judgment of such Court under which 
a sum of money is payable, not being a sum payable in respect of taxes or other charges of a like nature or in respect to 
a fine or other penalty, but shall in no case include an arbitration award, even if such an award is enforceable as a decree 
or judgment. 
45. Execution of decrees outside India— So much of the foregoing sections of this Part as empowers a Court to send a 
decree for execution to another Court shall be construed as empowering a Court in any State to send a decree for 
execution to any Court established by the authority of the Central Government outside India to which the State 
Government has by notification in the Official Gazette declared this section to apply. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Pondicherry— After section 45 insert the following:— 
"45-A. Execution of decrees etc. passed or made before the Commencement of the Code in Pondicherry— Any 
Judgment, decree or order passed or made before the Commencement of this Code by any Civil Court in the Union 
Territory of Pondicherry shall for the purpose of execution be deemed to have been passed or made under this Code. 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as extending the period of limitation to which any 
proceeding in respect of such judgment decree or order may be subject." 
[Act No. 26 of 1968]. 
13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
46. Precepts— (1) Upon the application of the decree-holder the Court which passed the decree may, whenever it thinks 
fit, issue a precept to any other Court which would be competent to execute such decree to attach any property 
belonging to the judgment-debtor and specified in the precept. 
(2) The Court to which a precept is sent shall proceed to attach the property in the manner prescribed in regard to the 
attachment of property in execution of a decree: 
Provided that no attachment under a precept shall continue for more than two months unless the period of attachment is 
extended by an order of the Court which passed the decree or unless before the determination of such attachment the 
decree has been transferred to the Court by which the attachment has been made and the decree-holder has applied for 
an order for the sale of such property. 
Questions to be determined by Court executing decree 
47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing decree— (1) All questions arising between the parties to the suit 
in which the decree was passed, or their representatives, and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the 
decree, shall be determined by the Court executing the decree and not by a separate suit. 
[29]* * * * 
(3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the representative of a party, such question shall, for the 
purposes of this section, be determined by the Court. 
[30] [Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit has been dismissed and a defendant against 
whom a suit has been dismissed are parties to the suit. 
Explanation II.—(a) For the purposes of this section, a purchaser of property at a sale in execution of a decree shall be 
deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and 
(b) all questions relating to the delivery of possession of such property to such purchaser or his representative shall be 
deemed to be questions relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree within the meaning of this 
section.] 
Limit of time for execution 
48. [Execution barred in certain cases].— Rep. by the limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), s. 28 (with effect from the 1st 
January, 1964) 
Transferees and legal representatives 
49. Transferee— Every transferee of a decree shall hold the same subject to the equities (if any) which the judgment-
debtor might have enforced against the original decree-holder. 
50. Legal representative— (1) Where a judgment-debtor dies before the decree has been fully satisfied, the holder of the 
decree may apply to the Court which passed it to execute the same against the legal representative of the deceased. 
(2) Where the decree is executed against such legal representative, he shall be liable only to the extent of the property of 
the deceased which has come to his hands and has not been duly disposed of; and, for the purpose of ascertaining such 
liability, the Court executing the decree may, of its own motion or on the application of the decree-holder, compel such 
legal representative to produce such accounts as it thinks fit. 
Procedure in execution 
51. Powers of Court to enforce execution— Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the Court 
may, on the application of the decree-holder, order execution of the decree— 
(a) by delivery of any property specifically decreed; 
(b) by attachment and sale or by the sale without attachment of any property; 
(c) by arrest and detention in prison [31][for such period not exceeding the period specified in section 58, where arrest 
and detention is permissible under that section]; 
(d) by appointing a receiver; or 
(e) in such other manner as the nature of the relief granted may require: 
14

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided that, where the decree is for the payment of money, execution by detention in prison shall not be ordered 
unless, after giving the judgment-debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be committed to prison, the 
Court, for reasons recorded in writing, is satisfied— 
(a) that the judgment-debtor, with the object or effect of obstructing or delaying the execution of the decree,— 
(i) is likely to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or 
(ii) has, after the institution of the suit in which the decree was passed, dishonestly transferred, concealed, or removed 
any part of his property, or committed any other act of bad faith in relation to his property, or 
(b) that the judgment-debtor has, or has had since the date of the decree, the means to pay the amount of the decree or 
some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or neglected to pay the same, or 
(c) that the decree is for a sum for which the judgment-debtor was bound in a fiduciary capacity to account. 
Explanation.—In the calculation of the means of the judgment-debtor for the purposes of clause (b), there shall be left 
out of account any property which, by or under any law or custom having the force of law for the time being in force, is 
exempt from attachment in execution of the decree. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— In section 51 of the Code Clause (bb) shall be inserted after clause (b). 
"(bb) by transfer other than sale by attachment or without attachment of any property" 
[U.P. Act No. 24 of 1954]. 
52. Enforcement of decree against legal representative— (1) Where a decree is passed against a party as the legal 
representative of a deceased person, and the decree is for the payment of money out of the property of the deceased, it 
may be executed by the attachment and sale of any such property. 
(2) Where no such property remains in the possession of the judgment-debtor and he fails to satisfy the Court that he has 
duly applied such property of the deceased as is proved to have come into his possession, the decree may be executed 
against the judgment-debtor to the extent of the property in respect of which he has failed so to satisfy the Court in the 
same manner as if the decree had been against him personally. 
53. Liability of ancestral property— For the purposes of section 50 and section 52, property in the hands of a son or 
other descendant which is liable under Hindu law for the payment of the debt of a deceased ancestor, in respect of 
which a decree has been passed, shall be deemed to be property of the deceased which has come to the hands of the son 
or other descendant as his legal representative. 
54. Partition of estate or separation of share— Where the decree is for the partition of an undivided estate assessed to 
the payment of revenue to the Government, or for the separate possession of a share of such an estate, the partition of 
the estate or the separation of the share shall be made by the Collector or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector 
deputed by him in this behalf, in accordance with the law (if any) for the time being in force relating to the partition, or 
the separate possession shares, of such estates. 
Arrest and detention 
55. Arrest and detention— (1) A judgment-debtor may be arrested in execution of a decree at any hour and on any day, 
and shall, as soon as practicable, be brought before the Court, and his detention may be in the civil prison of the district 
in which the Court ordering the detention is situate, or, where such civil prison does not afford suitable accommodation, 
in any other place which the State Government may appoint for the detention of persons ordered by the Courts of such 
district to be detained: 
Provided, firstly, that, for the purpose of making an arrest under this section, no dwelling-house shall be entered after 
sunset and before sunrise : 
Provided, secondly, that no outer door of a dwelling-house shall be broken open unless such dwelling-house is in the 
occupancy of the judgment-debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but when the officer authorised 
to make the arrest has duly gained access to any dwelling-house, he may break open the door of any room in which he 
has reason to believe the judgment-debtor is to be found : 
Provided, thirdly, that, if the room is in the actual occupancy of a woman who is not the judgment-debtor and who 
according to the customs of the country does not appear in public, the officer authorised to make the arrest shall give 
15

 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
notice to her that she is at liberty to withdraw, and, after allowing a reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her 
reasonable facility for withdrawing, may enter the room for the purpose of making the arrest : 
Provided, fourthly, that, where the decree in execution of which a judgment-debtor is arrested, is a decree for the 
payment of money and the judgment-debtor pays the amount of the decree and the costs of the arrest to the officer 
arresting him, such officer shall at once release him. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that any person or class of persons whose 
arrest might be attended with danger or inconvenience to the public shall not be liable to arrest in execution of a decree 
otherwise than in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the State Government in this behalf. 
(3) Where a judgment-debtor is arrested in execution of a decree for the payment of money and brought before the 
Court, the Court shall inform him that he may apply to be declared an insolvent, and that he may be discharged, if he 
has not committed any act of bad faith regarding the subject of the application and if he complies with provisions of the 
law of insolvency for the time being in force. 
(4) Where a judgment-debtor express his intention to apply to be declared an insolvent and furnishes security, to the 
satisfaction of the Court, that he will within one month so apply, and that he will appear, when called upon, in any 
proceeding upon the application or upon the decree in execution of which he was arrested, the Court may release him 
from arrest, and, if he fails so to apply and to appear, the Court may either direct the security to be realised or commit 
him to the civil prison in execution of the decree. 
56. Prohibition of arrest or detention of women in execution of decree for money— Notwithstanding anything in this 
Part, the Court shall not order the arrest or detention in the civil prison of a woman in execution of a decree for the 
payment of money. 
57. Subsistence allowance— The State Government may fix scales, graduated according to rank, race and nationality, of 
monthly allowances payable for the subsistence of judgment-debtors. 
58. Detention and release— (1) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of a decree shall be so detained,— 
(a) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding [32][one thousand rupees, for a period not 
exceeding three months, and] 
[33] [(b) where the decree is for the payment of a sum of money exceeding five hundred rupees, but not exceeding one 
thousand rupees, for a period not exceeding six weeks :] 
Provided that he shall be released from such detention before the expiration of the [34][said period of detention]— 
(i) on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his detention being paid to the officer in charge of the civil prison, or 
(ii) on the decree against him being otherwise fully satisfied, or 
(iii) on the request of the person on whose application he has been so detained, or 
(iv) on the omission by the person, on whose application he has been so detained, to pay subsistence allowance : 
Provided, also, that he shall not be released from such detention under clause (ii) or clause (iii), without the order of the 
Court. 
[35] [(1A) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no order for detention of the judgment-debtor in civil 
prison in execution of a decree for the payment of money shall be made, where the total amount of the decree does not 
exceed five hundred rupees.] 
(2) A judgment-debtor released from detention under this section shall not merely by reason of his release be discharged 
from his debt, but he shall not be liable to be re-arrested under the decree in execution of which he was detained in the 
civil prison. 
59. Release on ground of illness— (1) At any time after a warrant for the arrest of a judgment-debtor has been issued 
the Court may cancel it on ground of his serious illness. 
(2) Where a judgment-debtor has been arrested, the Court may release him if, in its opinion, he is not in a fit state of 
health to be detained in the civil prison. 
(3) Where a judgment-debtor has been committed to the civil prison, he may be released therefrom,— 
16

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) by the State Government, on the ground of the existence of any infectious or contagious disease, or 
(b) by the committing Court, or any Court to which that Court is subordinate, on the ground of his suffering from any 
serious illness. 
(4) A judgment-debtor released under this section may be re-arrested, but the period of his detention in the civil prison 
shall not in the aggregate exceed that prescribed by section 58. 
Attachment 
[36][60. Property liable to attachment and sale in execution of decree— (1) The following property is liable to 
attachment and sale in execution of a decree, namely, lands, houses or other buildings, goods, money, banknotes, 
cheques, bills of exchange, hundis, promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities for money, debts, 
shares in corporation and, save as hereinafter mentioned, all other saleable property, movable or immovable, belonging 
to the judgment-debtor, or over which, or the profits of which, he has a disposing power which he may exercise for his 
own benefit,whether the same be held in the name of the judgment-debtor or by another person in trust for him or on his 
behalf : 
Provided that the following particulars shall not be liable to such attachment or sale, namely:— 
(a) the necessary wearing-apparel, cooking vessels, beds and bedding of the judgment-debtor, his wife and children, and 
such personal ornaments as, in accordance with religious usage, cannot be parted with by any woman; 
(b) tools of artisans, and, where the judgment-debtor is an agriculturist, his implements of husbandry and such cattle and 
seed-grain as may, in the opinion of the court, be necessary to enable him to earn his livelihood as such, and such 
portion of agricultural produce or of any class of agricultural produce as may have been declared to be free from 
liability under the provisions of the next following section; 
(c) houses and other buildings (with the materials and the sites thereof and the land immediately appurtenant thereto and 
necessary for their enjoyment) belonging to [37][an agriculturist or a labourer or a domestic servant] and occupied by 
him; 
(d) books of account; 
(e) a mere right to sue for damages; 
(f) any right of personal service; 
(g) stipends and gratuities allowed to pensioners of the government [38][or of a local authority or of any other 
employer] or payable out of any service pension fund notified in the Official Gazette by the Central Government or the 
State government in this behalf, and political pension; 
(h) the wages of labourers and domestic servants, whether payable in money or in kind; 
(i) salary to the extent of the first [39][four hundred rupees] and two third of the remainder] in execution of any decree 
other than a decree for maintenance. 
[40] [Provided that where any part of such portion of the salary as is liable to attachment has been under attachment, 
whether continuously or intermittently, for a total period of twenty-four months, such portion sail be exempt from 
attachment until the expiry of a further period of twelve months, and, where such attachment has been made in 
execution of one and the same decree, shall, after the attachment has continued for a total period of twenty-four months, 
be finally exempt from attachment in execution of that decree.] 
[41] [(ia) one-third of the salary in execution of any decree for maintenance;] 
[42][(j) the pay and allowances of persons to whom the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 
1950), or the Navy Act (62 of 1957), applies;] 
(k) all compulsory deposits and other sums in or derived from and fund to which the Provident funds Act, 1925, (19 of 
1925), for the time being applies in so far as they are declared by the said Act not to be liable to attachment; 
[43] [(ka) all deposits and other sums in or derived from any fund to which the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968 (23 of 
1968) for the time being applies in so far as they are declared by the said Act as not to be liable to attachment; 
(kb) all moneys payable under a policy of insurance on the life of the judgment-debtor; 
17

 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(kc) the interest of a lessee of a residential building to which the provisions of law for the time being in force relating to 
control of rents and accommodation apply;] 
(1) any allowance forming part of the emoluments of any servant of the Government or of any servant of a railway 
company or local authority which the appropriate Government may by notification in the Official Gazette declare to be 
exempt from attachment, and any subsistence grant for allowance made to any such servant while under suspension; 
(m) an expectancy of succession by survivorship or other merely contingent or possible right or interest; 
(n) a right to future maintenance; 
(o) any allowance declared by any Indian law to be exempt from liability to attachment or sale in execution of a decree; 
and 
(p) where the judgment-debtor is a person liable for the payment of land-revenue; any movable property which, under 
any law for the time being applicable to him, is exempt from sale for the recovery of an arrears of such revenue. 
[44] [Explanation I.— The moneys payable in relation to the matters mentioned in clauses (g), (h), (i), (ia), (j), (1) and 
(o) are exempt from attachment or sale, whether before or after they are actually payable, and, in the case of salary, the 
attachable portion thereof is liable to attachment, whether before or after it is actually payable]. 
Explanation II.— [45][In clauses (1) and (ia)], "salary" means the total monthly emoluments, excluding any allowance 
declared exempt from attachment under the provisions of clause (1) derived by a person from his employment whether 
on duty or on leave]. 
Explanation [46][III]—In Clause (l), "appropriate Government" means— 
(i) as respect any person in the service of the Central Government, or any servant of a Railway Administration or of a 
cantonment authority or of the port authority of a major port, the Central Government; 
(ii) as respects any other [47][servant of the Government] or a servant of any other local authority skilled the State 
Government. 
[48][Explanation IV.—For the purposes of this proviso, "wages", includes bonus, and labourer" includes a 
skilled/unskilled or semi-skilled labourer. 
Explanation V.—For the purposes of this proviso, the expression "agriculturist" means a person who cultivates land 
personally and who depends for his livelihood mainly on the income from agricultural land, whether as owner, tenant, 
partner or agricultural labourer. 
Explanation VI.—For the purposes of Explanation V, an agriculturist shall be deemed to cultivate land personally, if he 
cultivates land— 
(a) by his own labour, or 
(b) by the labour of any member of his family, or 
(c) by servants or labourers on wages payable in case or in kind (not being as a share of the produce), or both.] 
[49] (1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an agreement by which a 
person agrees to waive the benefit on any exemption under this section shall be void.] 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt houses and other buildings (with the materials and the sites 
thereof and the land immediately appurtenant thereto and necessary for their enjoyment) from attachment or sale in 
execution of decrees for rent of any such house, building, site or land. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Andhra Pradesh— In its application to Andhra area of the State of Andhra Pradesh in section 60(1) clause (g) of the 
proviso after the words "pensioners of the Government" the words "or a local authority" shall be inserted 
[C.P.C. (Andhra Pradesh) (Andhra area) Amendment Act 1950] 
In its application to whole of State of A.P. in proviso to sub-section (1) of section 60. 
(i) after clause (k) the following shall be inserted. 
18

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
"(kk) amount payable under policies issued in pursuance of the Rules for the Andhra Pradesh Govt. life Insurance and 
Provident Fund". 
(ii) after Explanation 2 insert the following:— 
"Explanation 2A.— Where any sum payable to a Government servant is exempt from attachment under the provisions 
of clause (kk), such sum shall remain exempt from attachment notwithstanding the fact that owing to the death of the 
Govt. servant it is payable to same other person" 
[Act No. XI of 1953 and Act No. X of 1962]. 
In its application to Hyderabad area of Andhra Pradesh: 
(i) after clause (g) of the proviso to section 60 (1) insert the following:— 
"(gg) pension granted or continued by the Central Govt. the Govt. of Hyderabad or any other State Govt. on account of 
part services or present infirmities or as a compassionate allowance and." 
(ii) In Explanation 2A, for the words brackets and letter "Clause (kk)" substitute "Clause (gg) or Clause (kk)" 
[A.P. Act No. XVIII of 1953]. 
In its application to the State of Andhra Pradesh: 
(i) After clause (kk) of Section 60(1) proviso the following inserted: 
"(kkk) amounts payable under the Andhra Pradesh State Employees Family Benefit Fund Rules." 
(ii) For the words "(kk)', in Explanation 2A, the words "(kkk) inserted.(A.P. Act No. 24 of 1979). 
Gujarat— (i) In section 60(1) after clause (g) insert the following. 
"(gg) stipends and gratuities allowed to pensioners of a local authority". 
(ii) Explanation 1, after the word "(g)" insert "(gg)". 
[Bombay Act No. LX of 1948). 
Himachal Pradesh— (i) In section 60 (1) at the end of Clause (c) insert the following. 
"or compensation paid for such houses and buildings (including compensation for the materials and the sites and the 
land referred to above) acquired for public purpose". 
(ii) After clause (c), clause (cc) shall be inserted. 
"(cc) Compensation paid for agricultural lands belonging to agriculturists and acquired for public purpose". 
[C.P.C. (H.P. Amendment) Act 1956]. 
Karnataka— In section 60 (1) after clause (p) the following shall be inserted in its application to Karnataka (except 
Bellary District). 
"(pp) Where the judgment-debtor is a servant of the State Govt. who has insured his life under the rules in force relating 
to the official branch of Karnataka Govt. Life Insurance Department:— 
(1) in the case of insurance effected prior to the ninth day of may, 1911 the whole of the bonus payable or paid 
thereunder to such servant, or in the event of his death to his nominee or other person or persons entitled to such bonus 
under the said rules, and 
(2) in the case of Insurance effected on or after the ninth day of May, 1911, and such insurance is Compulsory premia 
payable or paid to such servant or in the event of his death to his nominee or other person or persons entitled to such 
bonus under the said rules. 
[C.P.C. (Mysore Amendment) Act, 1952]. 
Kerala— After clause (g) the following clause (gg) shall be inserted:— 
"(gg) all moneys payable to the beneficiaries under the Family Benefit Scheme for the employee of the Government of 
Kerala. 
19

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
[Kerala Act 1 of 1988]. 
Maharashtra— (i) In section 60(1) after clause (g) of the proviso insert the following:— 
"(gg) in the Hyderabad area of the State of Maharashtra any pension granted or continued by the Central Govt. or the 
Govt. of the former State of Hyderabad or any other State Govt. on account of part services or present infirmities or as a 
compassionate allowance which is not covered by clause (g)". 
(ii) after clause (kb) insert the following: 
"(kbb) the amounts payable under the policies issued in pursuance of the Rules for the Hyderabad State Life Insurance 
and Provident Fund, which are not covered under clause (ka) or (kb)". 
[Maharashtra Act No. LXV of 1977]. 
Punjab and Haryana— (i) In clause (c) of the proviso to section 60 (1) for the words "occupied by him" substitute the 
following:— 
"not proved by the decree holder to have been let out on rent or lent to persons other than his father mother, wife, son, 
daughter, daughter in law, brother, sister or other dependents or left vacant for a period of a year or more". 
(ii) after clause (c) insert the following:— 
"(cc) milch animals, whether in milk or in calf, animals used for the purposes of transport or draught cart and open 
spaces or endorures belonging to an agriculturist and required for use in case of need for tying cattle parking carts or 
stacking fodder or manure. 
(ccc) one main residential house and other buildings attached to it (with the material and the sites there of and the land 
immediately appurtenant there to and necessary for there enjoyment belonging to a judgment-debtor other than an 
agriculturist and occupied by him: 
Provided that the protection afforded by this clause shall not extend to any property specifically charged with the debt 
sought to be recovered". 
(iii) after sub-section (2) insert the following sub-sections. 
"(3) Notwithstanding any other law for the time being in force an agreement by which a debtor agrees to waive any 
benefit of any exemption under this section shall be void. 
(4) For the purposes of this section the word `agriculturist' shall include every person whether as owner tenant partner or 
agricultural labour who depends for his livelihood mainly on income from agricultural land as defined in the Punjab 
Alienation of Land Act. 1910. 
(5) Every member of a tribe notified as agricultural under the Punjab Alienation of Land Act, 1900 and every member 
of a scheduled caste shall be presumed to be as agriculturist until the contrary is provided. 
(6) No order for attachment shall be made unless the court is satisfied that the property sought to be attached is not 
exempt from attachment or sale" 
[Punjab Act No. VII of 1934, 12 of 1940, 6 of 1946 and 44 of 1960]. 
Rajasthan — (i) In clause (b) of section 60 (1) after the word `Agriculturist' the words `his milch cattle and those likely 
to calve within two years' shall be inserted. 
(ii) after clause (k) of the proviso to section 60 (1) insert the following. 
"(kk) moneys payable under life Insurance Certificates issued in pursuance of the Rajasthan Govt. Servants Insurance 
Rules, 1953". 
(iii) after Explanation 3 insert the following: 
"Explanation 4.— Where any money payable to a Govt. servant of the state is exempt from attachment under the 
provision contained in clause (kk), such money shall remain exempt from the attachment notwithstanding the fact there 
owing to the death of a Govt. servant it is payable to some other person". 
[Rajasthan Act No. 16 of 1957 and 19 of 1958]. 
20

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tamil Nadu— "Section 60 (1), clause (g) of the proviso after the words `stipends and gratuties allowed to the 
pensioners of the Govt. insert the words "or of a local authority" 
[C.P.C. (Madras Amendment) Act, 1950]. 
Union Territory of Chandigarh— Same as in Punjab and Haryana 
[Act No. 31 of 1966]. 
Union Territory of Pundicherry— Same as in Tamil Nadu 
[Act No. 26 of 1968]. 
Uttar Pradesh— In section 60(1) after Explanation 1 add the following: 
"Explanation 1-A.— Particulars mentioned in clause (c) are exempt from sale in execution of a decree whether passed 
before or after the commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (United Provinces) Amendment Act, 1948 for 
enforcement of a mortgage of charge thereon". 
[U.P. Act No. 35 of 1948]. 
61. Partial exemption of agricultural produce— The State Government may, by general or special order published in the 
Official Gazette, declare that such portion of agricultural produce, or of any class of agricultural produce, as may appear 
to the State Government to be necessary for the purpose of providing until the next harvest the due cultivation of the 
land and for the support of the judgment-debtor and his family, shall, in the case of all agriculturists or of any class of 
agriculturists, be exempted from liability to attachment or sale in exaction of a decree. 
62. Seizure of property in dwelling-house— (1) No person executing any process under this Code directing or 
authorizing seizure of movable property shall enter any dwelling-house after sunset and before sunrise. 
(2) No outer door of a dwelling-house shall be broken open unless such dwelling-house is in the occupancy of the 
judgment-debtor and he refuses or in any way prevents access thereto, but when the person executing any such process 
has duly gained access to any dwelling-house, he may break open the door of any room in which he has reason to 
believe any such property to be. 
(3) Where a room in a dwelling-house is in the actual occupancy of a woman who, according to the customs of the 
country, does not appear in public, the person executing the process shall give notice to such woman that she is at 
liberty to withdraw; and, after allowing reasonable time for her to withdraw and giving her reasonable facility for 
widhrawing, he may enter such room for the purpose of seizing the property, using at the same time every precaution, 
consistent with these provisions, to prevent its clandestine removal. 
63. Property attached in execution of decrees of several Courts— (1) Where property not in the custody of any Court is 
under attachment in execution of decrees of more Courts than one, the Court which shall receive or realize such 
property and shall determine any claim thereto any objection to the attachment thereof shall be the Court of highest 
grade, or, where there is no difference in grade between such Courts, the Court under whose decree the property was 
first attached. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to invalidate any proceeding taken by a Court executing one of such decrees. 
[50] [Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (2), "proceeding taken by a Court" does not include an order 
allowing, to a decree-holder who has purchased property at a sale held in execution of a decree, set off to the extent of 
the purchase price payable by him.] 
64. Private alienation of property after attachment to be void— Where an attachment has been made, any private 
transfer or delivery of the property attached or of any interest there in and any payment to the judgment-debtor of any 
debt, dividend or other monies contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all claims enforceable under the 
attachment. 
Explanation—For the purposes of this section, claims enforceable under an attachment include claims for the rateable 
distribution of assets. 
Sale 
65. Purchaser's title— Where immovable property is sold in execution of a decree and such sale has become absolute, 
the property shall be deemed to have vested in the purchaser from the time when the property is sold and not from the 
time when the sale becomes absolute. 
21

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
66. [51][* * * *] 
67. Power for State Government to make rules as to sales of land in execution of decrees for payment of money— (1) 
The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for any local area imposting conditions 
in respect of the sale of any class of interests in land in execution of decrees for the payment of money, where such 
interests are so uncertain or undermined as, in the opinion of the State Government to make it impossible to fix their 
value. 
(2) When on the date on which this Code came into operation in any local area, any special rules as to sale of and in 
execution of decrees were in force therein, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare 
such rules to be in force, or may by a like notification, modify the same. 
Every notification issued in the exercise of the powers conferred by this sub-section shall set out the rules so continued 
or modified. 
[52] [(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before the State 
Legislature.] 
Delegation to Collector of power to execute decrees against immovable property 
68.—72. Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1956 (66 of 1956), s. 7. 
Distribution of assests 
73. Proceeds of execution-sale to be reateably distributed among decree-holders— (1) Where assests are held by a Court 
and more persons than one have, before the receipt of such assests, made application to the Court for the execution of 
decrees for the payment of money passed against the same judgment-debtor and have not obtained satisfaction thereof, 
the assests, after deducting the costs of realization, shall be reteably distributed among all such persons : 
Provided as follows :— 
(a) where any property is sold subject to a mortgage or charge, the mortgage or incumbrancer shall not be entitled to 
share in any surplus arising from such sale; 
(b) where any property liable to be sold in execution of a decree is subject to a mortgage or charges the Court may, with 
the consent of the mortgagee or incumbrancer, order that the property be sold free from the mortgage or charge, giving 
to the mortgagee or incumbrancer the same interest in the proceeds of the sale as he had in the property sold; 
(c) where any immovable property is sold in execution of a decree ordering its sale for the discharge of an incumbrance 
thereon, the proceeds of sale shall be applied— 
first, in defraying the expenses of the sale; 
secondly, in discharging the amount due under the decree; 
thirdly, in discharging the interest and principal moneys due on subsequent incumbrances (if any); and 
fourthly, rateably among the holders of decrees for the payment of money against the judgment debtor, who have, prior 
to the sale of the property, applied to the Court which passed the decree ordering such sale for execution of such 
decrees, and have not obtained satisfaction thereof. 
(2) Where all or any of the assests liable to be rateably distributed under this section are paid to a person not entitled to 
receive the same, any person so entitled may sue such person to compel him to refund the assets. 
(3) Nothing in this section affects any right of the Government. 
Resistance to execution 
74. Resistance to execution— Where the Court is satisfied that the holder of a decree for the possession of immovable 
property or that the purchaser of immovable property sold in execution of a decree has been resisted or obstructed in 
obtaining possession of the property by the judgment-debtor or some person on his behalf and that such resistance or 
obstruction was without any just cause, the Court may, at the instance of the decree-holder or purchaser, order the 
judgment-debtor or such other person to be detained in the civil prison for a term which may extend to thirty days and 
may further direct that the decree-holder or purchaser be put into possession of the property. 
PART III-INCIDENTAL PROCEEDINGS 
22

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Commissions 
75. Power of court to issue commissions- Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, the court may 
issue a commission­
(a) to examine any person; 
(b) to make a local investigation; 
(c) to examine or adjust accounts; or 
(d) to make a partition; 
[53] [(e) to hold a scientific, technical, or expert investigation; 
(f) to conduct sale of property which is subject to speedy and natural decay and which is in the custody of the Court 
pending the determination of the suit; 
(g) to perform any ministerial act.] 
76. Commission to another Court- (1) A commission for the examination of any person may be issued to any Court (not 
being a High Court) situate in a State other than the State in which the Court of issue is situate and having jurisdiction in 
the place in which the person to be examined resides. 
(2) Every Court receiving a commission for the examination of any person under sub-section (1) shall examine him or 
cause him to be examined pursuant thereto, and the commission, when it has been duly executed, shall be returned 
together with the evidence taken under it to the Court from which it was issued, unless the order for issuing the 
commission has otherwise directed, in which case the commission shall be returned in terms of such order. 
77. Letter of request- In lieu of issuing a commission the Court may issue a letter of request to examine a witness 
residing at any place not within India. 
78. Commissions issued by foreign Courts- Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed the 
provisions as to the execution and return of commissions for the examination of witnesses shall apply to commissions 
issue by or as the instance of­
(a) Courts situate in any part of India to which the provisions of this Code do not extend; or 
(b) Courts established or continued by the authority of the Central Government outside India, or 
(c) Courts of any State or country outside India. 
PART IV-SUITS IN PARTICULAR CASES 
Suits by or against the Government or public officers in their official capacity. 
79. Suits by or against Government— In a suit by or against the Government, the authority to be named as plaintiff or 
defendant, as the case may be, shall be— 
(a) in the case of a suit by or against the Central Government, the Union of India, and 
(b) in the case of a suit by or against a State Government, the State. 
80. Notice— [54][(1)][55][Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), no suits shall be instituted against the 
Government (including the Government of the State of Jammu & Kashmir) or against a public officer in respect of any 
act purporting to be done by such officer in his official capacity, until the expiration of two months next after notice in 
writing has been delivered to, or left at the office of— 
(a) in the case of a suit against the Central Government, except where it relates to a railway, a Secretary to that 
Government; 
(b) in the case of a suit against the Central Government where it relates to railway, the General Manager of that railway; 
(bb) in the case of a suit against the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir the Chief Secretary to that 
Government or any other officer authorised by that Government in this behalf; 
(c) in the case of a suit against any other State Government, a Secretary to that Government or the Collector of the 
district; 
23

 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and, in the case of a public officer, delivered to him or left at this office, stating the cause of action, the name, 
description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the relief which he claims; and the plaint shall contain a statement 
that such notice has been so delivered or left. 
[56] [(2) A suit to obtain an urgent or immediate relief against the Government (including the Government of the State 
of Jammu & Kashmir) or any public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by such public officer in his 
official capacity, may be instituted, with the leave of the Court, without serving any notice as required by sub-section 
(1); but the Court shall not grant relief in the suit, whether interim or otherwise, except after giving to the Government 
or public officer, as the case may be, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause in respect of the relief prayed for in the 
suit : 
Provided that the Court shall, if it is satisfied, after hearing the parties, that no urgent or immediate relief need be 
granted in the suit, return the plaint for presentation to it after complying with the requirements of sub-section (1). 
(3) No suit instituted against the Government or against a public officer in respect of any act purporting to be done by 
such public officer in his official capacity shall be dismissed merely by reason of any error or defect in the notice 
referred to in sub-section (1), if in such notice— 
(a) the name, description and the residence of the plaintiff had been so given as to enable the appropriate authority or 
the public officer to identify the person serving the notice and such notice had been delivered or left at the office of the 
appropriate authority specified in sub-section (1), and 
(b) the cause of action and the relief claimed by the plaintiff had been substantially indicated.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Madhya Pradesh — (i) After sub-section (3) of Section 80 the following inserted: 
"(4) where in a suit or proceeding referred to in Rule 3B of Order 1, the state is joined as a defendant or non applicant or 
where the Court orders joinder of the State as defendant or non applicant in exercise of powers under Rule 10(2) of 
order 1 such suit or proceeding shall not be dismissed by reasons of Omission of the plaintiff or applicant to issue notice 
under sub-section (1)". 
(ii) In sub-section (1) of section 80 for the words "sub-section (2)" substitute "sub-section (2) or (4)". 
[M.P. Act No. 29 of 1948]. 
81. Exemption from arrest and personal appearance— In a suit instituted against a public officer in respect of any act 
purporting to be done by him in his official capacity— 
(a) the defendant shall not be liable to arrest nor his property to attachment otherwise than in execution of a decree, and 
(b) where the Court is satisfied that the defendant cannot absent himself from his duty without detriment to the public 
service, it shall exempt him from appearing in person. 
82. Execution of decree— [57](1) Where, in a suit by or against the Government or by or against a public officer in 
respect of any act purporting to be done him in his official capacity, a decree is passed against the Union of India or a 
State or, as the case may be, the public officer, such decree shall not be executed except in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section(2)]. 
(2) Execution shall not be issued on any such decree unless it remains unsatisfied for the period of three months 
computed from the date of [58][such decree]. 
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to an order or award as they apply in relation to a 
decree, if the order or award— 
(a) is passed or made against the Union of India or a State or a public officer in respect of any such act as aforesaid, 
whether by a Court or by any other authority; and 
(b) is capable of being executed under the provisions of this code or of any other law for the time being in force as if it 
were a decree. 
Suits by Alliens and by or against Foreign Rulers, Ambassadors and Envoys 
24

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
83. When aliens may sue— Alien enemies residing in India with the permission of the Central Government, and alien 
friends, may sue in any Court otherwise competent to try the suit, as if they were citizens of India, but alien enemies 
residing in India without such permission, or residing in a foreign country, shall not sue in any such court. 
Explanation—Every person residing in a foreign country, the Government of which is at war with India and carrying on 
business in that country without a licence in that behalf granted by the Central Government, shall, for the purpose of this 
section, be deemed to be an alien enemy residing in a foreign country. 
84. When foreign State may sue.— A foreign State may sue in any competent Court: 
Provided that the object of the suit is to enforce a private right vested in the Ruler of such State or in any officer of such 
State in his public capacity. 
85. Persons specially appointed by Government to prosecute or defend on behalf of foreign Rulers— (1) The Central 
Government may, at the request of the Ruler of a foreign State or at the request of any person competent in the opinion 
of the Central Government to act on behalf of such Ruler, by order, appoint any persons to prosecute or defend any suit 
on behalf of such Ruler, and any persons so appointed shall be deemed to be the recognized agents by whom 
appearances, acts and applications under this Code may be made or done on behalf of such Ruler. 
(2) An appointment under this section may be made for the purpose of a specified suit or of several specified suits, or 
for the purpose of all such suits as it may from time to time be necessary to prosecute or defend on behalf of such Ruler. 
(3) A person appointed under this section may authorise or appoint any other persons to make appearances and 
applications and do acts in any such suit or suits as if he were himself a party thereto. 
86. Suits against foreign Rulers, Ambassadors and Envoys— (1) No.****[59] foreign State may be sued in any Court 
otherwise competent to try the suit except with consent of the Central Government certified in writing by a Secretary to 
that Government : 
Provided that a person may, as a tenant of immovable property, sue without such consent as aforesaid [60][a foreign 
State] from whom he holds or claims to hold the property. 
(2) Such consent may be given with respect to a specified suit or to several specified suits or with respect to all suits of 
any specified class or classes, and may specify, in the case of any suit or class of suits, the Court in which [61][the 
foreign State] may be sued, but it shall to be given, unless it appears to the Central Government that [62][the foreign 
State]. 
(a) has instituted a suit in the Court against the person desiring to sue [63][it], or 
(b) [64][itself] or another, trades within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or 
(c) is in possession of immovable property situate within those limits and is to be sued with reference to such property 
or for money charged thereon, or 
(d) has expressly or impliedly waived the privilege accorded to [65][it] by this section. 
[66] [(3) Except with the consent of the Central Government, certified in writing by a Secretary to that government, no 
decree shall be executed against the property of any foreign State.] 
(4) The proceeding provisions of this section shall apply in relation to — 
[67] [(a) any Ruler of a foreign State;] 
[68] [(aa)] any ambassador or Envoy of a foreign State ; 
(b) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country; and 
(c) any such member of the staff [69][of the foreign State or the staff or retinue of the Ambassador] or Envoy of a 
foreign State or of the High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country as the Central Government may, by general or 
special order, specify in this behalf. 
[70][as they apply in relation to a foreign State]. 
[71][(5) the following persons shall not be arrested under this Code, namely : — 
(a) any ruler of a foreign State; 
25

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) any Ambassador or Envoy of a foreign State; 
(c) any High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country; 
(d) any such member of the staff of the foreign State or the staff or retinue of the Ruler, Ambassador or Envoy of a 
foreign State or of the High Commissioner of a Commonwealth country, as the Central Government may, by general or 
special order, specify in this behalf. 
(6) Where a request is made to the Central Government for the grant of any consent referred to in sub-section (1), the 
Central Government shall, before refusing to accede to the request in whole or in part, give to the person making the 
request a reasonable opportunity of being heard.] 
87. Style of foreign Rulers as parties to suits— The Ruler of a foreign State may sue, and shall be sued, in the name of 
his State: 
Provided that in giving the consent referred to in section 86, the Central Government may direct that the Ruler may be 
sued in the name of an agent or in any other name. 
87A. Definitions of "foreign State" and "Ruler" — (1) In this Part,— 
(a) "foreign State" means any State outside India which has been recognised by the Central Government; and 
(b) "Ruler", in relation to a foreign State, means the person who is for the time being recognized by the Central 
Government to be the head of that State. 
(2) Every Court shall take judicial notice of the fact — 
(a) that a state has or has not been recognized by the Central Government; 
(b) that a person has or has not been recognized by the Central Government to be the head of a State. 
Suits against Rulers of former Indian States 
87B. Applications of sections 85 and 86 to Rulers of former Indian States.— (1) In the case of any suit by or against the 
Ruler of any former Indian State which is based wholly or in part upon a cause of action which arose before the 
commencement of the Constitution or any proceedings arising out of such suit, the provisions of section 85 and sub­
sections (1) and (3) of section 86 shall apply in relation to such Ruler as they apply in relation to the Ruler of a foreign 
State. 
(2) In this section— 
(a) "former Indian State" means any such Indian State as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify for the purposes of this; 
(b) "commencement of the Constitution" means the 26th day of January, 1950; and 
(c) "Ruler" in relation to a former Indian State, has the same meaning as in article 363 of the Constitution.RInterpleader 
88. Where interpleader suit may be reinstituted— Where two or more persons claim adversely to one another the same 
debts, sum of money or other property, movable or immovable, from another person, who claims no interest therein 
other than for charges or costs and who is ready to pay or deliver it to the rightful claimant such other person may 
institute a suit of interpleader against all the claimants for the purpose of obtaining a decision as to the person to whom 
the payment or delivery shall be made and of obtaining indemnity for himself: 
Provided that where any suit is pending in which the rights of all parties can properly be decided, no such suit of 
interpleader shall be instituted. 
PART V-SPECIAL PROCEEDINGS 
Arbitration 
89. [Arbitration.] Rep. by the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940), s. 49 and Sch. III 
Special case 
90. Power to state case for opinion of Court— Where any person agree in writing to state a case for the opinion of the 
Court, then the Court shall try and determine the same in the manner prescribed. 
26

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
[72][Public nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting the public] 
91. Public nuisances and other wrongful acts affecting the public.— [73][(1) in the case of a public nuisance or other 
wrongful act affecting, or likely to affect, the public, a suit for a declaration and injunction or for such other relief as 
may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case, may be instituted,— 
(a) by the Advocate General, or 
(b) with the leave of the Court, by two or more persons, even though no special damage has been caused to such persons 
by reason of such public nuisance or other wrongful act.] 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect any right of suit which may exist independently 
of its provisions. 
92. Public charities— (1) In the case of any alleged breach of any express or constructive trust created for public 
purposes of a charitable or religious nature, or where the direction of the Court is deemed necessary for the 
administration of any such trust, the Advocate-General, or two or more persons having an interest in the trust and 
having obtained the [74][leave of the Court] may institute a suit, whether contentious or not, in the principal Civil Court 
of original jurisdiction or in any other Court empowered in that behalf by the State Government within the local limits 
of whose jurisdiction the whole or any part of the subject-matter of the trust is situate to obtain a decree— 
(a) removing any trustee; 
(b) appointing a new trustee; 
(c) vesting any property in a trustee; 
(cc) directing a trustee who has bee removed or a person who has ceased to be a trustee, to deliver possession of any 
trust property in his possession to the person entitled to the possession of such property; 
(d) directing accounts and inquires; 
(e) declaring what proportion of the trust property or of the interest therein shall be allocated to any particular object of 
the trust; 
(f) authorizing the whole or any part of the trust property to be let, sold, mortgaged or exchanged; 
(g) settling a scheme; or 
(h) granting such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require. 
(2) Save as provided by the Religious Endowments Act, 1863 (20 of 1863) or by any corresponding law in force in the 
territories which, immediately before the 1st November, 1956, were comprised in Part B States, no suit claiming any of 
the reliefs specified in sub-section (1) shall be instituted in respect of any such trust as is therein referred to except in 
conformity with provisions of that sub-section. 
[75] [(3) The Court may alter the original purposes of an express or constructive trust created for public purposes of a 
charitable or religious nature and allow the property or income of such trust or any portion thereof to be applied cy press 
in one or more the following circumstances, namely:— 
(a) where the original purposes of the trust, in whole or in part,— 
(i) have been, as far as may be, fulfilled; or 
(ii) cannot be carried out at all, or cannot be carried out according to the directions given in the instrument creating the 
trust or, where there is no such instrument, according to the spirit of the trust; 
(b) where the original purposes of the trust provide a use for a part only of the property available by virtue of the trust; 
or 
(c) where the property available by virtue of the trust and other property applicable for similar purposes can be more 
effectively used in conjunction with, and to that end can suitably be made applicable to any other purpose, regard being 
had to the spirit of the trust and its applicability to common purposes; or 
(d) where the original purposes, in whole or in part, were laid down by reference to an area which then was, but has 
since ceased to be, a unit for such purposes; or 
27

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) ceased, as being useless or harmful to the community, or 
(iii) ceased to be, in law, charitable, or 
(iv) ceased in any other way to provide a suitable and effective method of using the property available by virtue of the 
trust, regard being had to the spirit of the trust.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— After clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 92 insert the following: 
"(bb) for delivery of possession of any trust property against a person who has ceased to be trustee or has been 
removed". 
[U.P. Act No. 24 of 1954]. 
93. Exercise of powers of Advocate-General outside presidency-towns— The powers conferred by sections 91 and 92 
on the Advocate-General may, outside the presidency-towns, be, with the previous sanction of the State Government, 
exercised also by the Collector or by such officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf. 
PART VI-SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS 
94. Supplemental Proceedings— In order to prevent the ends of justice from being, defeated the Court may, 
if it is to prescribed,— 
(a) issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause why he should not 
give security for his appearance, and if he fails to comply with any order for security commit him to the civil 
prison; 
(b) direct the defendant to furnish security to produce any property belonging to him and to place the same at 
the disposal of the Court or order the attachment of any property; 
(c) grant a temporary injunction and in case of disobedience commit the person guilty thereof to the civil 
prison and order that his property be attached and sold; 
(d) appoint a receiver of any property and enforce the performance of his duties by attaching and selling his 
property; 
(e) make such other interlocutory orders as may appear to the Court to be just and convenient. 
95. Compensation for obtaining arrest, attachment or injunction on insufficient grounds— Where, in any suit 
in which an arrest or attachment has been effected or a temporary injunction granted under the last 
preceding section,— 
(a) it appears to the Court that such arrest, attachment or injunction was applied for on insufficient grounds, 
or 
(b) the suit of the plaintiff fails and it appears to the Court that there was no reasonable or probable grounds 
for instituting the same, 
the defendant may apply to the Court, and the Court may, upon such application, award against the plaintiff 
by its order such amount, not exceeding one thousand rupees, as it deems a reasonable compensation to 
the defendant for the [76][expense or injury (including injury to reputation) caused to him]; 
Provided that a Court shall not award, under this section, an amount exceeding the limits of its peculiar 
jurisdiction. 
(2) An order determining any such application shall bar any suit for compensation in respect of such arrest, 
attachment or injunction. 
PART VII-APPEALS 
Appeals from original decrees 
96. Appeal from original decree— (1) Save where otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or 
by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie from every decree passed by any Court 
exercising original jurisdiction the Court authorized to hear appeals from the decisions of such Court. 
28

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
(2) An appeal may lie from an original decree passed ex parte. 
(3) No appeal shall lie from a decree passed by the Court with the consent of parties. 
[77] [(4) No appeal shall lie, except on a question of law, from a decree in any suit of the nature cognisable 
by Courts of Small Cause, when the amount or value of the subject-matter of the original suit does not 
exceed three thousand rupees.] 
97. Appeal from final decree where no appeal from preliminary decree— Where any party aggrieved by a 
preliminary decree passed after the commencement of this Code does not appeal from such decree, he shall 
be precluded from dispating its correctness in any appeal with may be preferred from the final decree. 
98. Decision where appeal heard by two or more Judges— (1) Where an appeal is heard by a Bench of two 
or more Judges, the appeal shall be decided in accordance with the opinion of such Judges or of the majority 
(if any) of such Judges. 
(2) Where there is no such majority which concurs in a judgment varying or reversing the decree appealed 
from, such decree shall be confirmed : 
Provided that where the Bench hearing the appeal is [78][composed of two or other even number of Judges 
belonging to a Court consisting of more Judges than those constituting the Bench] and the Judges 
composing the Bench differ in opinion on a point of law, they may state the point of law upon which they 
differ and the appeal shall then be heard upon that point only by one or more of the other Judges, and such 
point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority (if any) of the Judges who have heard the 
appeal including those who first heard it. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to alter or otherwise affect any provision of the letters patent of 
any High Court. 
99. No decree to be reversed or modified for error or irregularity not affecting merits or jurisdiction— No 
decree shall be reversed or substantially varied, nor shall any case be remanded in appeal on account of any 
misjoinder [79][or non-joinder] of parties or causes of action or any error, defect or irregularity in any 
proceedings in the suit, not affecting the merits of the case or the jurisdiction of the Court. 
[80][Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to non-joinder of a necessary party.] 
[81][99A. No order under section 47 to be refused or modified unless decision of the case is prejudicially 
affected— Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 99, no order under section 47 shall 
be reversed or substantially varied, on account of any error, defect or irregularity in any proceeding relating 
to such order, unless such error, defect or irregularity has prejudicially affected the decision of the case.} 
Appeals from appellate decrees 
[82][100. Second appeal— (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any other 
law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the High Court from every decree passed in appeal by 
any Court subordinate to the High Court, if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial 
question of law. 
(2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex parte. 
(3) In an appeal under this section, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the substantial question 
of law involved in the appeal. 
(4) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it shall 
formulate that question. 
(5) The appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and the respondent shall, at the hearing of the 
appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such question : 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the Court to 
hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law, not formulated by it, if 
it is satisfied that the case involves such question.] 
[83][100A. No further appeal in certain cases— Notwithstanding anything contained in any Letters Patent for 
any High Court or in any other instrument having the force of law or in any other law for the time being in 
29

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
force, where any appeal from an appellate decree or order is heard and decided by a single Judge of a High 
Court, no further appeal shall lie from the judgment, decision or order or such single Judge in such appeal or 
from any decree passed in such appeal.] 
101. Second appeal on no other grounds— No second appeal shall lie except on the ground mentioned in 
section 100. 
102. No second appeal in certain suits— No second appeal shall lie in any suit of the nature cognizable by 
Courts of Small Causes, when the amount or value of the subject-matter of the original suit does not exceed 
[84][three thousand rupees]. 
[85][103. Power of High Court to determine issues of fact— In any second appeal, the High Court may, if the 
evidence on the record is sufficient, determine any issue necessary for the disposal of the appeal,— 
(a) which has not been determined by the lower Appellate Court or both by the Court of first instance and the 
lower Appellate Court, or 
(b) which has been wrongly determined by such Court or Courts reason of a decision on such question of 
law as is referred to in section 100.] 
Appeals from orders 
104. Orders from which appeal lies— (1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders, and save as otherwise 
expressly provided in the body of this Code or by any law for the time being in force, from no other orders:— 
[Clauses (a) to (f) omitted] 
(ff) an order under section 35A; 
[86] [(ffa) an order under section 91 or section 92 refusing leave to institute a suit of the nature referred to in 
section 91 or section 92, as the case may be;] 
(g) an order under section 95; 
(h) an order under any of the provisions of this Code imposing a fine or directing the arrest or detention in the 
civil prison of an person except where such arrest or detention is in execution of a decree; 
(i) any order made under rules from which an appeal is expressly allowed by rules; 
Provided that not appeal shall lie against any order specified in clause (ff) save on the ground that no order, 
or an order for the payment of a less amount, ought to have been made. 
(2) No appeal shall lie from any order passed in appeal under this section. 
105. Other orders— (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided, no appeal shall lie from any order made by a 
Court in the exercise of its original or appellate jurisdiction; but, where a decree is appealed from, any error, 
defect or irregularity in any order, affecting the decision of the case, may be set forth as ground of objection 
in the memorandum of appeal. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any party aggrieved by an order of remand 
[87]***** from which an appeal lies does not appeal therefrom, he shall thereafter be precluded from 
disputing its correctness. 
106. What Courts to hear appeals— Where an appeal from any order is allowed it shall lie to the Court to 
which an appeal would lie from the decree in the suit in which such order was made, or where such order is 
made by a Court (not being a High Court) in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction, then to the High Court. 
General provisions relating to appeals 
107. Powers of Appellate Court— (1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, an 
Appellate Court shall have power— 
(a) to determine a case finally; 
(b) to remand a case; 
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial; 
30

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) to take additional evidence or to require such evidence to be taken. 
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Appellate Court shall have the same powers and shall perform as nearly as may 
be the same duties as are conferred and imposed by this Code on Courts of original jurisdiction in respect of 
suits instituted therein. 
108. Procedure in appeals from appellate decrees and orders— The provisions of this Part relating to 
appeals from original decree shall, so far as may be, apply to appeals— 
(a) from appellate decrees, and 
(b) from orders made under this Code or under any special or local law in which a different procedure is not 
provided. 
Appeals to the Supreme Court 
109. When appeals lie to the Supreme Court— Subject to the provisions in Chapter IV of Part V of the 
Constitution and such rules as may, from time to time, be made by the Supreme Court regarding appeals 
from the Courts of India, and to the provisions hereinafter contained, an appeal shall lie to the Supreme 
Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding of a High Court, if the High Court 
certifies— 
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance; and 
(ii) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court. 
110. [Value of subject matters] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1973 (49 of 1973). 
111. [Bar of certain appeals] Rep. by the A.O. 1950. 
111A. [Appeals to Federal Court] Rep. by the Federal Court Act, 1941 (21 of 1941). 
112. Savings— (1) Nothing contained in this Code shall be deemed— 
(a) to affect the powers of the Supreme Court under article 136 or any other provision of the Constitution, or 
(b) to interfere with any rules made by the Supreme Court, and for the time being in force, for the 
presentation of appeals to that Court, or their conduct before that Court. 
(2) Nothing herein contained applies to any matter of criminal or admiralty or vice-admiralty jurisdiction or to 
appeals from orders and decrees of Prize Courts. 
PART VIII-REFERENCE, REVIEW AND REVISION 
113. Reference to High Court— Subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed, any Court 
may state a case and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court, and the High Court may make such 
order thereon as it thinks fit : 
Provided that where the Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a question as to the validity 
of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained in an Act, Ordinance or Regulation, the 
determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, and is of opinion that such Act, Ordinance, 
Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative, but has not been so declared by the High Court to which that 
Court is subordinate or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case setting out its opinion and the 
reasons therefor, and refer the same for the opinion of the High Court. 
Explanation.—In this section "Regulation" means any Regulation of the Bengal, Bombay or Madras Code or 
Regulation as defined in the General Clauses Act, 1897, (10 of 1897) or in the General Clauses Act of a 
State. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Andhra Pradesh— In the Explanation to section 113 after the words "any Regulation of the Bengal, Bombay 
or Madras Code" insert the words "or any Regulation of the Madras Code in force, in the State of Andhra as 
it existed immediately before the 1st Nov. 1956". 
[Andhra Adoption of Laws (Amendment) orders of 1954 and 1957]. 
31

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Tamilnadu— In the Explanation to section 113 after the words "any Regulation of the Bengal, Bombay or 
Madras Code" insert the words "or any Regulation of the Madras Code in force in the territories specified in 
Second Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959" 
[Madras Added Territories Adaptation of Laws Order, 1961]. 
Union Territory of Pondicherry— Some as in Tamil Nadu (Act No. 49 of 1962). 
114. Review— Subject as aforesaid, any person considering himself aggrieved— 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Code, but from which no appeal has been 
preferred, 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Court, or 
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, may apply for a review of judgment to the 
Court which passed the decree or made the order, and the Court may make such order thereon as it thinks 
fit. 
115. Revision— [88][(1)] The High Court may call for the record of an case which has been decided by any 
Court subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if such subordinate Court 
appears— 
(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or 
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity, 
the High Court may make such order in the case as it thinks fit : 
[89] [Provided that the High Court shall no, under this section, vary or reverse any order made, or any order 
deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or other proceeding, except where— 
(a) the order, if it had been made in favour of the party applying for revision, would have finally disposed of 
the suit or other proceedings, or 
(b) the order, if allowed to stand, would occasion a failure of justice or cause irreparable injury to the party 
against whom it was made.] 
[90] [(2) The High Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any decree or order against which an 
appeal lies either to the High Court or to any Court subordinate thereto. 
Explanation.—In this section, the expression "any case which has been decided" includes any order made, 
or any order deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Madhya Pradesh— For Section 115 of the principal Act, the following Section substituted. 
"115. Revision.— The High Court may call for the record of any cases which has been decided by any Court 
subordinate to such High Court and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if such subordinate Court appears— 
(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law; or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested; or 
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity, the High Court may 
make such order in the case as it thinks fit; 
Provided that the High Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any order made or any order 
deciding an issue, in the course of a suit or other proceedings except where:— 
(a) the order, if it had been made in favour of the party applying for the revision, would have finally disposed 
of the suit or proceeding; or 
(b) the order, if allowed to stand, would occasion a failure of justice or cause irreparable injury to the party 
against whom it was made. 
32

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) The High Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any decree or order against which an appeal 
lies either to the High Court or to any court subordinate thereto. 
Explanation.— In this section, the expression "any case which has been decided" includes any order made, 
or any order deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding. 
[M.P. Act 4 of 1994]. 
Orissa.— In its application to the State of Orissa, for section 115, substitute the following:— 
"115. Revision.— The High Court, in cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of the value 
exceeding one lakh rupees, and the District Court, in any other case, including a case arising out of an 
original suit or other proceedings instituted before the commencement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Orissa 
Amendment) Act, 1991, may call for the record of any case which has been decided by any Court 
subordinate to the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, and in which no appeal lies thereto, 
and if such subordinate Court appears— 
(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law; or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested; or 
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity, the High Court or the 
District Court, as the case may be, may make such order in the case as it thinks fit; 
Provided that in respect of cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of any valuation decided by 
the District Court, the High Court alone shall be competent to make an order under this section: 
Provided further that the High Court or the District Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any 
order, including an order deciding an issue, made in the course of a suit or other proceedings, except 
where,— 
(i) the order, if so varied or reversed, would finally dispose of the suit or other proceedings; or 
(ii) the order, if allowed to stand, would occasion a failure of justice or cause irreparable injury to the party 
against whom it was made. 
Explanation.— In this section, the expression "any case which has been decided" includes any order 
deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding." 
[Orissa Act 26 of 1991]. 
Uttar Pradesh.— In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh, for section 115, substitute the following:— 
"115 Revision.— The High Court, in cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of the value 
exceeding one lakh rupees or such higher amount not exceeding five lakh rupees as the High Court may 
from time to time fix, by notification published in the Official Gazette including such suits or other proceedings 
instituted before the date of commencement of the U.P. Civil Laws (Amendment) Act, 1991, or as the case 
may be, the date of commencement of such notification and the District Court in any other case, including a 
case arising out of an original suit or other proceedings instituted before such date, may call for the record of 
any case which has been decided by any Court subordinate to such High Court or District Court, as the case 
may be, and in which no appeal lies thereto, and if such subordinate Court appears— 
(a) to have exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law; or 
(b) to have failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested; or 
(c) to have acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material irregularity, 
the High Court or the District Court, as the case may be, may make such order in the case as it thinks fit: 
Provided that in respect of cases arising out of original suits or other proceedings of any valuation, decided 
by the District Court, the High Court alone shall be competent to make an order under this section: 
Provided further that the High Court or the District Court shall not, under this section, vary or reverse any 
order including an order deciding an issue, made in the course of a suit or other proceeding, except where,— 
(i) the order, if so varied or reversed, would finally dispose of the suit or other proceeding; or 
33

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(ii) the order, if allowed to stand, would occasion a failure of justice or cause irreparable injury to the party 
against whom it was made: 
Provided also that where a proceeding of the nature in which the District Court may call for the record and 
pass orders under this Section was pending immediately before the relevant date of commencement referred 
to above, in the High Court, such Court shall proceed to dispose of the same. 
Explanation.— In this section, the expression "any case which has been decided" includes any order 
deciding an issue in the course of a suit or other proceeding." 
[U.P. Acts 31 of 1978 and 17 of 1991] 
West Bengal— After Section 115 of the Code the following section 115A inserted: 
"115A. District Court's powers of revision— (1) A District Court may exercise all or any of the power which 
may be exercised by the High Court under section 115. 
(2) Where any proceedings by way of revision is commenced before a District Court in pursuance of the 
provision of sub-section (1), the provisions of section 115 shall, so for as may be, apply to such proceeding 
and references to the said section 60 the High Court shall be construed as reference to the District Court. 
(3) Where any proceeding for revision is commenced before the District Court, the decision of the District 
Court on such proceeding shall be final and no further proceeding by way of revision shall be entertained by 
the High Court or any other Court. 
(4) If any application for revision has been made by any party either to the High Court under section 115 or to 
the District Court under this section, no further application by the same party shall be entertained by the 
other of them. 
(5) A Court of an Additional Judge shall have and may exercise all the powers of a District Court under this 
section in respect of any proceeding which may be transferred to it by or under any general or special order 
of the District Court" 
[West Bengal Act No. 15 of 1988]. 
PART IX-SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE HIGH COURTS NOT BEING THE COURT OF A 
JUDICIAL COMMISSIONER 
116. Part to apply only to certain High Courts— This Part applies only to High Courts not being the Court of a 
Judicial Commissioner. 
117. Application of Code to High Court.— Save as provided in this Part or in Part X or in rules, the provisions 
of this Court shall apply to such High Courts. 
118. Execution of decree before ascertainment of costs— Where any such High Court considers it necessary 
that a decree passed in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction should be executed before the amount of 
the costs incurred in the suit can be ascertained by taxation, the Court may order that the decree shall be 
executed forthwith except as to so much thereof as relates to the costs; 
and, as to so much thereof as relates to the costs, that the decree may be executed as soon as the amount 
of the costs shall be ascertained by taxation. 
119. Unauthorized persons not to address Court— Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to authorize any 
person on behalf of another to address the Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, or to examine 
witnesses, except where the Court shall have in the exercise of the power conferred by its charter authorized 
him so to do, or to interfere with the power of the High Court to make rules concerning advocates, vakils and 
attorneys. 
120. Provisions not applicable to High Court in original civil jurisdiction— (1) The following provisions shall 
not apply to the High Court in the exercise of its original civil jurisdiction, namely, sections 16, 17 and 20. 
PART X-RULES 
34

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121. Effect of rules in First Schedule— The rules in a First Schedule shall have effect as if enacted in the 
body of this Code until annulted or altered in accordance with the provisions of this Part. 
122. Power of certain High Courts to make rules— High Courts not being the Court of a Judicial 
Commissioner may, from time to time after previous publication, make rules regulating their own procedure 
and the procedure of the Civil Courts subjects to their superintendence, and may be such rules annul, alter 
or add to all or any of the rules in the First Schedule. 
123. Constitution of Rule Committees in certain States— (1) A committee to be called the Rule Committee, 
shall be constituted at the town which is the usual place of sitting of each of the High Courts referred to in 
section 122. 
(2) Each such Committee shall consist of the following persons, namely— 
(a) three Judges of the High Court established at the town at which such Committee is constituted, one of 
whom at least has served as a District Judge or a Divisional Judge for three years, 
(b) two legal practitioners enrolled in that Court 
(c) a Judge of a Civil Court subordinate to the High Court[91]***** 
[92]*** 
(3) The members of each such Committee shall be appointed by the [93][High Court], which shall also 
nominate one of their number to be President : 
[94]*** 
(4) Each member of any such Committee shall hold office for such period as may be prescribed by the 
[95][High Court] in this behalf; and whenever any member retires, resigns, dies or ceases to reside in the 
State in which the Committee was constituted or becomes incapable of acting as a member of the 
Committee, the said [96][High Court] may appoint another person to be a member in his stead. 
(5) There shall be a secretary to each such Committee who shall be appointed by the [97][High Court] and 
shall receiver such remuneration as may be provided in this behalf by the State Government. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Assam and Nagaland— Substitute the following for clause (a) sub-section (2) of section 123. 
"(a) three judges of the High Court established at the town at which such committee is constituted, provided 
that the Chief Justice may appoint only two judges of the High Court on the Committee if the number of 
Judges of the High Court does not exceed three" 
[Assam Act No. VIII of 1953]. 
Tamil Nadu— In section 123 sub-section (2). 
(a) "In clause (b) for the words `two legal practitioners' substitute the words `three legal practitioners'." 
(b) "Omit the words `Madras' in clause (d)". 
[Tamil Nadu Act No. 15 of 1970]. 
124. Committee to report to High Court.— Every Rule Committee shall make a report to the High Court 
established at the town at which it is constituted on any proposal to annul, alter or add to the rules in the First 
Schedule or to make new rules, and before making any rules under section 122 the High Court shall take 
such report into consideration. 
125. Power of other High Courts to make rules— High Courts, other than the Courts specified in section 122, 
may exercise the powers conferred by that section in such manner and subject to such conditions as the 
State government may determine: 
Provided that any such High Court may, after previous publication, make a rule extending within the local 
limits of its jurisdiction any rules which have been made by any other High Court. 
35

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126. Rules to be subject to approval— Rules made under the foregoing provisions shall be subject to the 
previous approval of the Government of the State in which the Court whose procedure the rules regulate is 
situate or, if that Court is not situate in any State, to the previous approval of Central Government. 
127. Publication of rules— Rules so made and approved shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall 
from the date of publication or from such other date as may be specified have the same force and effect, 
within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court which made them, as if they had been contained in 
the First Schedule. 
128. Matters for which rules may provide— (1) Such rules shall be not inconsistent with the provisions in the 
body of this Code, but, subject thereto, may provide for any matters relating to the procedure of Civil Courts. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub-section (1), such 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the service of summons, notices and other processes by post or in any other manner either generally or 
in any specified areas, and the proof of such service; 
(b) the maintenance and custody, while under attachment, of live-stock and other movable property, the fees 
payable for such maintenance and custody, the sale of such live-stock and property and the proceeds of 
such sale; 
(c) procedure in suits by way of counterclaim and the valuation of such suits for the purposes of jurisdiction; 
(d) procedure in garnishee and charging order either in addition to, or in substitution for, the attachment and 
sale of debts; 
(e) procedure where the defendant claims to be entitled to contribution or indemnity over against any person 
whether a party tot he suit or not; 
(f) summary procedure— 
(i) in suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money payable by the 
defendant, with or without interest, arising— 
on a contract express or implied; or 
on an enactment where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or in the nature of a debt 
other than a penalty; or 
on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or a liquidated demand only; or 
on trust; or 
(ii) in suits for the recovery of immovable property, with or without claim for rent or mesne profits, by a 
landlord against a tenant whose term has expired or has been duly determined by notice to quit, or has 
become liable to forfeiture for non- payment of rent, or against persons claiming under such tenant; 
(g) procedure by way of originating summons; 
(h) consolidation of suits, appeals and other proceedings; 
(i) delegation to any Registrar, Prothonotary or Master or other official of the Court of any judicial, quasi-
judicial and non-judicial duties; and 
(j) all forms, registers, books, entries and accounts which may be necessary or desirable for the transaction 
of the business of Civil Courts. 
129. Power of High Court to make rules as to their original Civil Procedure— Notwithstanding anything in this 
Code, any High Court not being the Court of a Judicial Commissioner may make such rules not inconsistent 
with the Letters Patent or order or other law establishing it to regulate its own procedure in the exercise of its 
original civil jurisdiction as it shall think fit, and nothing herein contained shall affect the validity of any such 
rules in force at the commencement of this Code. 
130. Powers of other High Court to make rules as to matters other than procedure— A High Court not being 
a High Court to which section 129 applies may, with the previous approval of the State Government make 
36

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
with respect to any matter other than procedure any rule which a High Court for a State might under article 
227 of the Constitution make with respect to any such matter for any part of the territories under its 
jurisdiction which is not included within the limits of a presidency town. 
131. Publication of rules— Rules made in accordance with section 129 or section 130 shall be published in 
the Official Gazette and shall from the date of publication or from such other date as may be specified have 
the force of law. 
PART XI-MISCELLANEOUS 
132. Exemption of certain women from personal appearance— (1)Women who, according to the customs 
and manners of the country, ought not to be compelled to appear in public shall be exempt from personal 
appearance in Court. 
(2) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to exempt such women from arrest in execution of civil 
process in any case in which the arrest of women is not prohibited by this Code. 
133. Exemption of other persons— (1)The following persons shall be entitled to exemption from personal 
appearance in Court, namely— 
(i) the President of India; 
(ii) the Vice-President of India; 
(iii) the Speaker of the House of the People; 
(iv) the Ministers of the Union; 
(v) the Judges of the Supreme Court; 
(vi) the Governors of States and the administrators of Union Territories; 
(vii) the Speakers of the State Legislative Assemblies; 
(viii) the Chairman of the State Legislative Councils; 
(ix) the Ministers of States; 
(x) the Judges of the High Courts; and 
(xi) the persons to whom section 87B applies. 
[98]*** 
(3) Where any person claims the privilege of such exemption, and it is consequently necessary to examine 
him by commission, he shall pay the costs of that commission, unless the party requiring his evidence pays 
such costs. 
134. Arrest other than in execution of decree— The provisions of sections 55, 57 and 59 shall apply, so far 
as may be, to all persons arrested under this Code. 
135. Exemption from arrest under civil process— (1) No Judge, Magistrate or other judicial officer shall be 
liable to arrest under civil process while going to, presiding in, or returning from his Court. 
(2) Where any matter is pending before a tribunal having jurisdiction therein, or believing in good faith that it 
has such jurisdiction, the parties thereto, their pleader, mukhtars, revenue-agents and recognized agents, 
and their witnesses acting in obedience to a summons, shall be exempt from arrest under civil process other 
than process issued by such tribunal for contempt of Court while going to or attending such tribunal for the 
purpose of such matter, and while returning from such tribunal. 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (2) shall enable a judgment-debtor to claim exemption from arrest under an order 
for immediate execution or where such judgment-debtor attends to show cause why he should not be 
committed to person in execution of a decree. 
135A. Exemption of members of legislative bodies from arrest and detention under civil process— [99][(1) No 
person shall be liable to arrest or detention in prison under civil process— 
37

 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) if he is a member of— 
(i) either House of Parliament, or 
(ii) the legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State, or 
(iii) a Legislative Assembly of a Union territory, 
during the continuance of any meeting of such House of Parliament or, as the case may be, of the 
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council; 
(b) if he is a member of any committee of— 
(i) either House of Parliament, or 
(ii) the Legislative Assembly of a State or Union territory, or 
(iii) the Legislative council of a State, 
during the continuance of any meeting of such committee; 
(c) if he is a member of— 
(i) either House of Parliament, or 
(ii) a Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State having both such Houses, 
during the continuance of a joint sitting, meeting, conference or joint committee of the Houses of Parliament 
or Houses of the State Legislature, as the case may be, 
and during the forty days before and after such meeting, sitting or conference.] 
(2) A person released from detention under sub-section (1), shall, subject the provisions, of the said sub­
section,be liable to re-arrest and to the further detention to which he would have been liable if he had not 
been released under the provisions of sub-section (1). 
136. Procedure where person to be arrested or property to be attached is outside district— (1) Where an 
application is made that any person shall be arrested or that any property shall be attached under any 
provision of this Code not relating to the execution of decrees, and such person resides or such property is 
situate outside the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court to which the application is made, the Court may, 
in its discretion, issue a warrant of arrest or make an order of attachment, and send to the District Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such person or property reside or is situate a copy of the warrant 
or order, together with the probable amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment. 
(2) The District Court shall, on receipt of such copy and amount, cause the arrest or attachment to be made 
by its own officers, or by a Court subordinate to itself, and shall inform the Court which issued or made such 
warrant or order of the arrest or attachment. 
(3) The Court making an arrest under this section shall send the person arrested to the Court by which the 
warrant of arrest was issued, unless he shows cause to the satisfaction of the former Court why he should 
not be sent to the later Court, or unless he furnishes sufficient security for his appearance before the later 
Court or for satisfying any decree that may be passed against him by that Court, in either of which cases the 
Court making the arrest shall release him. 
(4) Where a person to be arrested or movable property to be attached under this section is within th local 
limits of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court of Judicature at Fort William in Bengal or at 
Madras or at Bombay, the copy of the warrant of arrest or of the order of attachment, and the probable 
amount of the costs of the arrest or attachment, shall be sent to the Court of Small Causes of Calcutta, 
Madras or Bombay as the case may be, and that Court, on receipt of the copy and amount, shall proceed as 
if it were the District Court. 
137. Language of subordinate Courts— (1) The language which, on the commencement of this Code, is the 
language of any Court subordinate to a High Court shall continue to be the language of such subordinate 
Court until the State Government otherwise directs. 
38

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) The State Government may declare what shall be the language of any such Court and in what character 
applications to and proceedings in such Court shall be written. 
(3) Where this Court requires or allows anything other than the recording of evidence to be done in writing in 
any such Court, such writing may be in English; but if any party or his pleader is unacquainted with English a 
tanslation into the language of the Court shall, at his request, be supplied to him; and the Court shall make 
such order as it thinks fit in respect of the payment of the costs of such translation. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Rajasthan— For sub-section (3) of section 137 substitute the following: 
"(3) Wherever the code requires or allows anything other than the recording of evidence to be done in writing 
in any such court, such writing shall be in Hindi in Devnagri Script with the international from of Indian 
numerals. 
Provided that the court may in its decretion accept such writing in England on the undertaking of the party 
filing such writing, to file a Hindi translation of the same, within such time as may be granted by the Court 
and the opposite party shall have a copy of such writing in Hindi." 
[Raj. Act No. 7 of 1983]. 
Uttar Pradesh— To section 137 (3) insert the following proviso: 
"Provided that with effect from such date as the State Government in consultation with the High Court may 
by notification in the Gazette appoint, the language of every judgment, decree or order passed on made by 
such courts or classes of courts subordinate to the High Court and in such classes of cases as may be 
specified shall only be Hindi in Devnagri Script with the international form of Indian numerals". 
(U.P. Act No. 17 of 1970). 
138. Power of High Court to require evidence to be recorded in English— (1) The High Court may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct with respect to any Judge specified in the notification, or falling 
under a description set forth therein, that evidence in cases in which an appeal is allowed shall be taken 
down by him in the English language and in manner prescribed. 
(2) Where a Judge is prevented by any sufficient reason from complying with a direction under sub-section 
(1), he shall record the reason and cause the evidence to be taken down in writing from his dictation in open 
Court. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Tripura and Manipur— For section 138, substitute the following section:— 
"138. Power of High Court to require evidence to be record in English.— The High Court may, by notification, 
in the Official Gazette, direct with respect to any Judge specified in the notification, or falling under a 
description set forth therein that in cases in which an appeal is allowed, he shall take down, or cause to be 
taken down, the evidence in the English language and in the form and manner prescribed." 
[Assam Act 2 of 1941, State of Nagaland Act 27 of 1962]. 
139. Oath on affidavit by whom to be administered— In the case of any affidavit under this Code— 
(a) any Court or Magistrate, or 
[100] [(aa) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952); or] 
(b) any officer or other person whom a High Court may appoint in this behalf, or 
(c) any officer appointed by any other Court which the State Government has generally or specially 
empowered in this behalf, 
may administer the oath to the deponent. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— (i) for clause (b) of section 139 substitute: 
39

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
"(b) any person appointed in this behalf by a High Court or by a district court; or" 
(ii) for clause (c) of section 139 substitute: 
"(c) any person appointed in this behalf by such other court as the State Govt. may, by general or special 
order, empower in this behalf." 
[U.P. Act No. 11 of 1981]. 
140. Assessors in causes of salvage etc.— (1) In any admiralty or vice-admiralty cause of salvage, towage 
or collision, the Court, whether it be exercising its original or its appellate jurisdiction may, if it thinks fit, and 
shall upon request of either party to such cause, summon to its assistance, in such manner as it may direct 
or as may be prescribed , two competent assessors; and such assessors shall attend and assist accordingly. 
(2) Every such assessor shall receive such fees for his attendance, to be paid by such of the parties as the 
Court may direct or as may be prescribed. 
141. Miscellaneous proceedings— The procedure provided in this Code in regard to suit shall be followed, as 
far as it can be made applicable, in all proceedings in any Court of civil jurisdiction. 
[101][Explanation.—In this section, the expression "proceedings" includes proceedings under Order IX, but 
does not include any proceeding under article 226 of the Constitution.] 
142. Orders and notices to be in writing— All orders and notices served on or given to any person under the 
provisions of this Code shall be in writing. 
143. Postage— Postage, where chargeable on a notice, summons or letter issued under this Code and 
forwarded by post, and the fee for registering the same, shall be paid within a time to be fixed before the 
communications made : 
Provided that the State Government may remit such postage, or fee, or both, or may prescribe a scale of 
court-fees to be levied in lieu thereof. 
144. Application for restitution— (1) Where and in so far as a decree or an order is [102][varied or reversed 
in any appeal, revision or other proceedings or is set aside or modified in any suit instituted for the purpose 
the Court which passed the decree or order] shall, on the application of any party entitled to any benefit by 
way of restitution or otherwise, cause such restitution to be made as will, so far as may be, place the parties 
in the position which they would have occupied but for such decree or order or [103][such part thereof as has 
been varied, reversed, set aside or modified], and, for this purpose, the Court may make any orders, 
including orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of interest, damages, compensation and mesne 
profits, which are properly [104][consequential on such variation, reversal, setting aside or modification of the 
decree or order.] 
[105] [Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (1) the expression "Court which passed the decree or 
order" shall be deemed to include,— 
(a) where the decree or order has been varied or reversed in exercise of appellate or revisional jurisdiction, 
the Court of first instance; 
(b) where the decree or order has been set aside by a separate suit, the Court of first instance which passed 
such decree or order; 
(c) where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or has ceased to have jurisdiction to execute, it, the 
Court which, if the suit wherein the decree or order was passed were instituted at the time of making the 
application for restitution under this section, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.] 
(2) No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining any restitution or other relief which could be 
obtained by application under sub-section (1). 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— Substitute the following for sub-section (1) of section 144 of the Code: 
"(1) Where and in so far as a decree or an order is varied or reversed in appeal, revision or otherwise, the 
Court of first instance shall, on the application of any party entitled to any benefit by way of restitution or 
otherwise, cause such restitution to be made, as will, so for as may be, place the parties in the position which 
40

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
they would have occupied but for such decree or order or such part there of as has been varied or reversed; 
and for this purpose, the Court may make any orders, including orders for the refused of costs and for the 
payment of interest, damages, compensation and mesne profits, which are properly consequential on such 
variation or reversal". 
[U.P. Act No. 24 of 1954]. 
145. Enforcement of liability of surety— Where any person [106][has furnished security or given a 
guarantee]— 
(a) for the performance of any decree or any part thereof, or 
(b) for the restitution of any property taken in execution of a decree, or 
(c) for the payment of any money, or for the fulfilment of any condition imposed on any person, under an 
order of the Court in any suit or in any proceeding consequent thereon, 
[107][the decree or order may be executed in the manner therein provided for the execution of decree, 
namely :— 
(i) if he has rendered himself personally liable, against him to that extent; 
(ii) if he has furnished any property as security, by sale of such property to the extent of the security; 
(iii) if the case falls both under clauses (i) and (ii) then to the extent specified in those clauses, 
and such person shall, be deemed to be a party within the meaning of section 47 :] 
Provided that such notice as the Court in each case thinks sufficient has been given to the surety. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— Substitute the following for section 145; 
"145. Where any person has become liable as surety or given any property as security: 
(a) for the performance of any decree or any part there of, or 
(b) for the restitution of any property taken in execution of any decree, or 
(c) for the payment of any money or for the fulfilment of any condition imposed on any person, under an 
order of the Court in any suit or in any proceeding Consequent there on,— the decree or order may be 
executed in the manner herein provided for the execution of decrees:— 
(i) if he has rendered himself personally liable, against him to that extent; and 
(ii) if he has given any property as security, by sale of such property to the extent of the security; 
such person shall, for the purposes of appeal, be deemed to be a party within the meaning of section 47: 
Provided that such notice as the Court in each case thinks sufficient has been given to the surety. 
Explanation:— For the purposes of this section a person entrusted by a Court with custody of any property 
attached in execution of any decree or order shall be deemed to have become liable as surety for the 
restitution of such property within the meaning of clause (b)." 
[U.P. Act No. 24 of 1954]. 
146. Proceedings by or against representatives— Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by any law for 
the time being in force, where any proceeding may be taken or application made by or against any person 
then the proceeding may be taken or the application may be made by or against any person claiming under 
him. 
147. Consent or agreement by persons under disability— In all suits to which any person under disability is a 
party, any consent or agreement, as to any proceeding shall, if given or made with the express leave of the 
Court by the next friend or guardian for the suit, have the same force and effect as if such person, were 
under no disability and had given such consent or made such agreement. 
41

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
148. Enlargement of time— Where any period is fixed or granted by the Court for the doing of any act 
prescribed or allowed by this Code, the Court may, in its discretion, from time to time, enlarge such period, 
even though the period originally fixed or granted may gave expired. 
[108][148A. Right to lodge a caveat— (1) Where an application is expected to be made, or has been made, 
in a suit or proceedings instituted, or about to be instituted, in a Court, any person claiming a right to appear 
before the Court on the hearing of such application may lodge a caveat in respect thereof. 
(2) Where a caveat has been lodged under sub-section (1), the person by whom the caveat has been lodged 
(hereinafter referred to as the caveator) shall serve a notice of the caveat by registered post, 
acknowledgement due, on the person by whom the application has been or is expected to be, made, under 
sub-section (1). 
(3) Where, after a caveat has been lodged under sub-section (1), any application is filed in any suit or 
proceeding, the Court, shall serve a notice of the application on the caveator. 
(4) Where a notice of any caveat has been served on the applicant, he shall forthwith furnish the caveator at 
the caveator's expense, with a copy of the application made by him and also with copies of any paper or 
document which has been, or may be, filed by him in support of the application. 
(5) Where a caveat has been lodged under sub-section (1), such caveat shall not reman in force after the 
expiry of ninety days from the date on which it was lodged unless the application referred to in sub-section 
(1) has been made before the expiry of the said period.] 
149. Power to make up deficiency of court-fees— Where the whole or any part of any fee prescribed for any 
document by the law for the time being in force relating to court-fees has not been paid, the Court may, in its 
discretion, at any stage, allow the person, by whom such fee is payable, to pay the whole or part, as the case 
may be, of such court-fee; and upon such payment the document, in respect of which such fee is payable, 
shall have the same force and effect as if such fee had been paid in the first instance. 
150. Transfer of business— Save as otherwise provide, where the business of any Court is transferred to 
any other Court, the Court to which the business is so transferred shall have the same powers and shall 
perform the same duties as those respectively conferred and imposed by or under this Code upon the Court 
from which the business was so transferred. 
151. Saving of inherent powers of Court— Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect 
the inherent power of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to 
prevent abuse of the process of the Court. 
152. Amendment of judgments, decrees or orders— Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in judgments, decrees 
or orders or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may at any time be corrected by the 
Court either of its own motion or on the application of any of the parties. 
153. General power to amend— The Court may at any time and on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it 
may think fit, amend any defect or error in any proceeding in a suit, and all necessary amendments shall be 
made of the purpose of determining the real question or issue raised by or depending on such proceeding. 
[109][153A. Power to amend decree or order where appeal is summarily dismissed.— Where an Appellate 
Court dismisses an appeal under rule 11 of Order XLI, the power of the Court to amend, under section 152, 
the decree or order appealed against may be exercised by the Court which had passed the decree or order 
in the first instance, notwithstanding that the dismissal of the appeal has the effect of confirming the decree 
or order, as the case may be, passed by the Court of first instance. 
153B. Place of trial to be deemed to be open Court— The place in which any Civil Court is held for the 
purpose of trying any suit shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which the public generally may have 
access so far as the same can conveniently contain them : 
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into or trial of any 
particular case, that the public generally or any particular person, shall not have access to, or be or remain 
in, the room or building used by Court.] 
154. [Saving of present right of appeal]— Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (48 of 1952), s. 2 
and Sch. I. 
42

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155. [Amendment of certain Acts]— Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (48 of 1952), s. 2 and 
Sch. I. 
156. [Repeals]— Rep. by the Second Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 (17 of 1914), s. 3 and Sch. II. 
157. Continuance of orders under repealed enactments.— Notifications published, declarations and rules 
made, places appointed, agreements filed, scales prescribed, forms framed, appointments made and powers 
conferred under Act 8 of 1859 or under any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending the same or under 
any other enactment hereby repealed shall, so far as they are consistent with this Code, have the same force 
and effect is if they had been respectively published, made, appointed, filed, prescribed, framed and 
conferred under this Code and by the authority empowered thereby in such behalf. 
158. Reference to Code of Civil Procedure and other repealed enactments.— In every enactment or 
notification passed or issued before the commencement of this Code in which reference is made to or to any 
Charter or section of Act 8 of 1859 or any Code of Civil Procedure or any Act amending the same or any 
other enactment hereby repealed, such reference shall, so far as may be practicable, be taken to be made to 
this Code or to its corresponding Part, Order, section or rule. 
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE, 1908-THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
ORDER I-PARTIES OF SUITS 
[110][1. Who may be joined as plaintiffs— All persons may be joined in one suit as plaintiffs where— 
(a) any right to relief in respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is 
alleged to exist in such persons, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative; and 
(b) if such persons brought separate suits, any common question of law or fact would arise.] 
2. Power of Court to order separate trial— Where it appears to the Court that any joinder of plaintiffs may embarrass or 
delay the trial of the suit, the Court may put the plaintiffs to their election or order separate trials or make such other 
order as may be expedient. 
[111][3. Who may be joined as defendants— All persons may be joined in one suit as defendants where— 
(a) any right to relief in respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is 
alleged to exist against such persons, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative; and 
(b) if separate suits were brought against such persons, any common question of law or fact would arise.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Bihar.— In its application to the Scheduled Areas in the State of Bihar, in Order I, Rule 3, following proviso added:— 
"Provided that in suits for declaration of title or for possession relating to immovable properties of a member of the 
Scheduled Tribes as specified in Part III to the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, the Deputy 
Commissioner concerned shall also be joined as a defendant." 
[Bihar Scheduled Areas Regulation, 1969]. 
[112][3A. Power to order separate trials where joinder of defendants may embarrass or delay trial— Where it appears to 
o
the Court that any joinder of defendants may embarrass or delay the trial of the suit, the Court may order separate trials 
or make such other order as may be expedient in the interests of justice.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Madhya Pradesh.— In Order I of First Schedule to the Principal Act, after Rule 3-A, the following rule inserted:— 
"3-B. Conditions for entertainment of suits.— (1) No suit or proceeding for.— 
(a) declaration of title or any right over any agricultural land, with or without any other relief; or 
(b) specific performance of any contract for transfer of any agricultural land, with or without any other relief, shall be 
entertained by any Court, unless the plaintiff or applicant, as the case may be, knowing or having reason to believe that 
a return under section 9 of the Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1960 (No. 20 of 1960) in relation 
to land aforesaid has been or is required to be filed by him or by any other person before competent authority appointed 
43

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
under that Act, has impleaded the State of Madhya Pradesh as one of the defendants or non-applicants, as the case may 
be, to such suit or proceeding. 
(2) No Court shall proceed with pending suit or proceeding referred to in sub-rule (1) unless, as soon as may be, the 
State Government is so impleaded as a defendant or non-applicant. 
Explanation.— The expression "suit or proceeding" used in this sub-rule shall include appeal, reference or revision, but 
shall not include any proceeding for or connected with execution of any decree or final order passed in such suit or 
proceeding". 
[M.P. Act 29 of 1984]. 
4. Court may give judgment for or against one or more of joint parties.— Judgment may be given without any 
amendment— 
(a) for such one or more of the plaintiffs as may be found to be entitled to relief, for such relief as he or they may be 
entitled to; 
(b) against such one or more of the defendants as may be found to be liable, according to their respective liabilities. 
5. Defendant need not be interested in all the relief claimed— It shall not be necessary that every defendant shall be 
interested as to all the relief claimed in any suit against him. 
6. Joinder of parties liable on same contract— The plaintiff may, at his option, join as parties to the same suit all or any 
of the persons severally, or jointly and severely, liable on any one contract, including parties to bills of exchange, hundis 
and promissory notes. 
7. When plaintiff in doubt from whom redress is to be sought— Where the plaintiff is in doubt as to the person from 
whom he is entitled to obtain redress, he may join two or more defendants in order that the question as to which of the 
defendants is liable, and to what extent, may be determined as between all parties. 
[113][8. One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same interest— (1) Where there are numerous persons having 
the same interest in one suit,— 
(a) one or more of such persons may, with the permission of the Court, sue or be sued, or may defend such suit, on 
behalf of, or for the benefit of, all persons so interested; 
(b) the Court may direct that one or more of such persons may sue or be sued, or may defend such suit, on behalf of, or 
for the benefit of, all persons so interested. 
(2) The Court shall, in every case where a permission or direction is given under sub-rule (1), at the plaintiff's expense, 
give notice of the institution of the suit to all persons so interested either by personal service, or, where, by reason of the 
number of persons or any other cause, such service is not reasonably practicable, by public advertisement, as the Court 
in each case may direct. 
(3) Any person on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, a suit is instituted or defended, under sub-rule (1), may apply to 
the Court to be made a party to such suit. 
(4) No part of the claim in any such suit shall be abandoned under sub-rule (1), and no such suit shall be withdrawn 
under sub-rule (3), of rule 1 of Order XXIII, and no agreement, compromise or satisfaction shall be recorded in any 
such suit under rule 3 of that Order, unless the Court has given, at the plaintiff's expense, notice to all persons so 
interested in the manner specified in sub-rule (2). 
(5) Where any person suing or defending in any such suit does not proceed with due diligence in the suit or defence, the 
Court may substitute in his place any other person having the same interest in the suit. 
(6) A decree passed in a suit under this rule shall be binding on all persons on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, the 
suit is instituted, or defended, as the case may be. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of determining whether the persons who sue or are sued, or defend, have the same 
interest in one suit, it is not necessary to establish that such persons have the same cause of action as the person on 
whom behalf, or for whose benefit, they sue or are sued, or defend the suit, as the case may be.] 
[114][8A. Power of Court to permit a person or body of persons to present opinion or to take part in the proceedings— 
While trying a suit, the Court may, if satisfied that a person or body of persons is interested in any question of law 
which is directly and substantially in issue in the suit and that it is necessary in the public interest to allow that person or 
44

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
body of persons to present his or its opinion on that question of law, permit that person or body of persons to present 
such opinion and to take part in the proceedings of the suit as the Court may specify.] 
9. Misjoinder and nonjoinder— No suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or nonjoinder of parties, and the 
Court may in every suit deal with the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of the parties 
actually before it: 
[115][Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to nonjoinder of a necessary party.] 
10. Suit in name of wrong plaintiff— (1) Where a suit has been instituted in the name of the wrong person as plaintiff or 
where it is doubtful whether it has been instituted in the name of the right plaintiff, the Court may at any stage of the 
suit, if satisfied that the suit has been instituted thought a bona fide mistake, and that it is necessary for the 
determination of the real matter in dispute so to do, order any other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon 
such terms as the Court thinks just. 
(2) Court may stirke out or add parties.—The Court may at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or without the 
application of either party, and on such terms as may appear to the Court to be just, order that the name of any party 
improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out, and that the name, of any person who ought to have 
been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence before the Court may be necessary in order to enable 
the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit, be added. 
(3) No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing without a next friend or as the next friend of a plaintiff under any 
disability without his consent. 
(4) Where defendant added, plaint to be amended—Where a defendant is added, the plaint shall, unless the Court 
otherwise directs, be amended in such manner as may be necessary, and amended copes of the summons and of the 
plaint shall be served on the new defendant and, if the Court thinks fit, on the original defendant. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of the [116]Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877), section 22, the proceedings as 
against any person added as defendant shall be deemed to have begun only on the service of the summons. 
[117][10A. Power of Court to request any pleader to address it— The Court may, in its discretion, request any pleader 
to address it as to any interest which is likely to be affected by its decision on any matter in issue in any suit or 
proceeding, if the party having the interest which is likely to be so affected is not represented by any pleader.] 
11. Conduct of suit— The Court may give the conduct of [118][a suit] to such persons as it deems proper. 
12. Appearance of one of several plaintiffs or defendants for others— (1) Where there are more plaintiffs than one, any 
one or more of them may be authorized by any other of them to appear, plead or act for such other in any proceeding; 
and in like manner, where there are more defendants than one, any one or more of them may be authorized by any other 
of them to appear, plead or act for such other in any proceeding. 
(2) The authority shall be in writing signed by the party giving it and shall be filed in Court. 
13. Objections as to nonjoinder or misjoinder— All objections on the ground of non- joinder or misjoinder of parties 
shall be taken at the earliest possible opportunity and, in all cases where issue are settled, at or before such settlement, 
unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen, and any such objection not so taken shall be deemed to have 
been waived. 
ORDERS 
ORDER I-PARTIES OF SUITS 
[110][1. Who may be joined as plaintiffs— All persons may be joined in one suit as plaintiffs where— 
(a) any right to relief in respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is 
alleged to exist in such persons, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative; and 
(b) if such persons brought separate suits, any common question of law or fact would arise.] 
2. Power of Court to order separate trial— Where it appears to the Court that any joinder of plaintiffs may embarrass or 
delay the trial of the suit, the Court may put the plaintiffs to their election or order separate trials or make such other 
order as may be expedient. 
[111][3. Who may be joined as defendants— All persons may be joined in one suit as defendants where— 
45

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) any right to relief in respect of, or arising out of, the same act or transaction or series of acts or transactions is 
alleged to exist against such persons, whether jointly, severally or in the alternative; and 
(b) if separate suits were brought against such persons, any common question of law or fact would arise.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Bihar.— In its application to the Scheduled Areas in the State of Bihar, in Order I, Rule 3, following proviso added:— 
"Provided that in suits for declaration of title or for possession relating to immovable properties of a member of the 
Scheduled Tribes as specified in Part III to the Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, the Deputy 
Commissioner concerned shall also be joined as a defendant." 
[Bihar Scheduled Areas Regulation, 1969]. 
[112][3A. Power to order separate trials where joinder of defendants may embarrass or delay trial— Where it appears to 
o
the Court that any joinder of defendants may embarrass or delay the trial of the suit, the Court may order separate trials 
or make such other order as may be expedient in the interests of justice.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Madhya Pradesh.— In Order I of First Schedule to the Principal Act, after Rule 3-A, the following rule inserted:— 
"3-B. Conditions for entertainment of suits.— (1) No suit or proceeding for.— 
(a) declaration of title or any right over any agricultural land, with or without any other relief; or 
(b) specific performance of any contract for transfer of any agricultural land, with or without any other relief, shall be 
entertained by any Court, unless the plaintiff or applicant, as the case may be, knowing or having reason to believe that 
a return under section 9 of the Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1960 (No. 20 of 1960) in relation 
to land aforesaid has been or is required to be filed by him or by any other person before competent authority appointed 
under that Act, has impleaded the State of Madhya Pradesh as one of the defendants or non-applicants, as the case may 
be, to such suit or proceeding. 
(2) No Court shall proceed with pending suit or proceeding referred to in sub-rule (1) unless, as soon as may be, the 
State Government is so impleaded as a defendant or non-applicant. 
Explanation.— The expression "suit or proceeding" used in this sub-rule shall include appeal, reference or revision, but 
shall not include any proceeding for or connected with execution of any decree or final order passed in such suit or 
proceeding". 
[M.P. Act 29 of 1984]. 
4. Court may give judgment for or against one or more of joint parties.— Judgment may be given without any 
amendment— 
(a) for such one or more of the plaintiffs as may be found to be entitled to relief, for such relief as he or they may be 
entitled to; 
(b) against such one or more of the defendants as may be found to be liable, according to their respective liabilities. 
5. Defendant need not be interested in all the relief claimed— It shall not be necessary that every defendant shall be 
interested as to all the relief claimed in any suit against him. 
6. Joinder of parties liable on same contract— The plaintiff may, at his option, join as parties to the same suit all or any 
of the persons severally, or jointly and severely, liable on any one contract, including parties to bills of exchange, hundis 
and promissory notes. 
7. When plaintiff in doubt from whom redress is to be sought— Where the plaintiff is in doubt as to the person from 
whom he is entitled to obtain redress, he may join two or more defendants in order that the question as to which of the 
defendants is liable, and to what extent, may be determined as between all parties. 
[113][8. One person may sue or defend on behalf of all in same interest— (1) Where there are numerous persons having 
the same interest in one suit,— 
(a) one or more of such persons may, with the permission of the Court, sue or be sued, or may defend such suit, on 
behalf of, or for the benefit of, all persons so interested; 
46

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
(b) the Court may direct that one or more of such persons may sue or be sued, or may defend such suit, on behalf of, or 
for the benefit of, all persons so interested. 
(2) The Court shall, in every case where a permission or direction is given under sub-rule (1), at the plaintiff's expense, 
give notice of the institution of the suit to all persons so interested either by personal service, or, where, by reason of the 
number of persons or any other cause, such service is not reasonably practicable, by public advertisement, as the Court 
in each case may direct. 
(3) Any person on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, a suit is instituted or defended, under sub-rule (1), may apply to 
the Court to be made a party to such suit. 
(4) No part of the claim in any such suit shall be abandoned under sub-rule (1), and no such suit shall be withdrawn 
under sub-rule (3), of rule 1 of Order XXIII, and no agreement, compromise or satisfaction shall be recorded in any 
such suit under rule 3 of that Order, unless the Court has given, at the plaintiff's expense, notice to all persons so 
interested in the manner specified in sub-rule (2). 
(5) Where any person suing or defending in any such suit does not proceed with due diligence in the suit or defence, the 
Court may substitute in his place any other person having the same interest in the suit. 
(6) A decree passed in a suit under this rule shall be binding on all persons on whose behalf, or for whose benefit, the 
suit is instituted, or defended, as the case may be. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of determining whether the persons who sue or are sued, or defend, have the same 
interest in one suit, it is not necessary to establish that such persons have the same cause of action as the person on 
whom behalf, or for whose benefit, they sue or are sued, or defend the suit, as the case may be.] 
[114][8A. Power of Court to permit a person or body of persons to present opinion or to take part in the proceedings— 
While trying a suit, the Court may, if satisfied that a person or body of persons is interested in any question of law 
which is directly and substantially in issue in the suit and that it is necessary in the public interest to allow that person or 
body of persons to present his or its opinion on that question of law, permit that person or body of persons to present 
such opinion and to take part in the proceedings of the suit as the Court may specify.] 
9. Misjoinder and nonjoinder— No suit shall be defeated by reason of the misjoinder or nonjoinder of parties, and the 
Court may in every suit deal with the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of the parties 
actually before it: 
[115][Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to nonjoinder of a necessary party.] 
10. Suit in name of wrong plaintiff— (1) Where a suit has been instituted in the name of the wrong person as plaintiff or 
where it is doubtful whether it has been instituted in the name of the right plaintiff, the Court may at any stage of the 
suit, if satisfied that the suit has been instituted thought a bona fide mistake, and that it is necessary for the 
determination of the real matter in dispute so to do, order any other person to be substituted or added as plaintiff upon 
such terms as the Court thinks just. 
(2) Court may stirke out or add parties.—The Court may at any stage of the proceedings, either upon or without the 
application of either party, and on such terms as may appear to the Court to be just, order that the name of any party 
improperly joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, be struck out, and that the name, of any person who ought to have 
been joined, whether as plaintiff or defendant, or whose presence before the Court may be necessary in order to enable 
the Court effectually and completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in the suit, be added. 
(3) No person shall be added as a plaintiff suing without a next friend or as the next friend of a plaintiff under any 
disability without his consent. 
(4) Where defendant added, plaint to be amended—Where a defendant is added, the plaint shall, unless the Court 
otherwise directs, be amended in such manner as may be necessary, and amended copes of the summons and of the 
plaint shall be served on the new defendant and, if the Court thinks fit, on the original defendant. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of the [116]Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877), section 22, the proceedings as 
against any person added as defendant shall be deemed to have begun only on the service of the summons. 
[117][10A. Power of Court to request any pleader to address it— The Court may, in its discretion, request any pleader 
to address it as to any interest which is likely to be affected by its decision on any matter in issue in any suit or 
proceeding, if the party having the interest which is likely to be so affected is not represented by any pleader.] 
11. Conduct of suit— The Court may give the conduct of [118][a suit] to such persons as it deems proper. 
47

 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. Appearance of one of several plaintiffs or defendants for others— (1) Where there are more plaintiffs than one, any 
one or more of them may be authorized by any other of them to appear, plead or act for such other in any proceeding; 
and in like manner, where there are more defendants than one, any one or more of them may be authorized by any other 
of them to appear, plead or act for such other in any proceeding. 
(2) The authority shall be in writing signed by the party giving it and shall be filed in Court. 
13. Objections as to nonjoinder or misjoinder— All objections on the ground of non- joinder or misjoinder of parties 
shall be taken at the earliest possible opportunity and, in all cases where issue are settled, at or before such settlement, 
unless the ground of objection has subsequently arisen, and any such objection not so taken shall be deemed to have 
been waived. 
ORDER II- FRAME OF SUIT 
1. Frame of suit— Every suit shall as far as practicable be framed so as to afford ground for final decision upon the 
subjects in dispute and to prevent further litigation concerning them. 
2. Suit to include the whole claim— (1) Every suit shall include the whole of the claim which the plaintiff is entitled to 
make in respect of the cause of action; but a plaintiff may relinquish any portion of his claim in order to bring the suit 
within the jurisdiction of any Court. 
(2) Relinquishment of part of claim—Where a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentionally relinquishes, any 
portion of his claim he shall not afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted or relinquished. 
(3) Omission to sue for one of several reliefs—A person entitled to more than one relief in respect of the same cause of 
action may sue for all or any of such reliefs; but if he omits, except with the leave of the Court, to sue for all such 
reliefs, he shall not afterwards sue for any relief so omitted. 
Explanation—For the purposes of this rule an obligation and a collateral security for its performance and successive 
claims arising under the same obligation shall be deemed respectively to constitute but one cause of action. 
Illustration 
A lets a house to B at a yearly of rent Rs. 1200. The rent for the whole of the years 1905, 1906 and 1907 is due and 
unpaid. A sues B in 1908 only for the rent due for 1906. A shall not afterwards sue B for the rent due for 1905 or 1907. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh.— In Order II, Rule 2.— 
(a) the existing Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation I, and after Explanation I, as so numbered the following 
Explanation II shall be inserted, namely:— 
"Explanation II.— For the purposes of this rule a claim for ejectment of the defendant from immoable property let out 
to him and a claim for money due from him on account of rent or compensation for use and occupation of that property, 
shall be deemed to be claims in respect of distinct causes of action": 
(b) for the illustration, the following illustration shall be substituted, namely:— 
"Illustration.— A lets immovable property to B at a yearly rent. The rent for the whole of the years 1905, 1906 and 
1907 is due and unpaid, and the tenancy is determined before A sues B in 1908, only for the rent due for 1906. A may 
afterwards sue B for ejectment but not for the rent due for 1905 or 1907". 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976]. 
3. Joinder of causes of action— (1) Save as otherwise provided, a plaintiff may unite in the same suit several causes of 
action against the same defendant, or the same defendants jointly; and any plaintiffs having causes of action in which 
they are jointly interested against the same defendant or the same defendants jointly may unite such causes of action in 
the same suit. 
(2) Where causes of action are united, the jurisdiction of the Court as regards the suit shall depend on the amount or 
value of the aggregate subject-matters at the date of instituting the suit. 
4. Only certain claims to be joined for recovery of immovable property— No cause of action shall, unless with the leave 
of the Court, be joined with a suit for the recovery of immovable property, except— 
48

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(a) claims for mesne profits or arrears of rent in respect of the property claimed or any part thereof; 
(b) claims for damages for breach of any contract under which the property or any part thereof is held; and 
(c) claims in which the relief sought is based on the same cause of action: 
Provided that nothing in this rule shall be deemed to prevent any party in a suit for foreclosure or redemption from 
asking to be put into possession of the mortgaged property. 
5. Claims by or against executor, administrator or heir— No claim by or against an executor, administrator or heir, as 
such, shall be joined with claims by or against him personally unless the last mentioned claims are alleged to arise with 
reference to the estate in respect of which the plaintiff or defendant sues or is sued as executor, administrator or heir, or 
are such as he was entitled to, or liable for, jointly with the deceased person whom he represents. 
[119][6. Power of Court to separate trials— Where it appears to the Court that the joinder of causes of action in one suit 
may embarrass or delay the trial or is otherwise inconvenient, the Court may order separate trials or make such other 
order as may be expedient in the interests of justice.] 
7. Objections as to misjoinder— All objections on the ground of misjoinder of causes of action shall be taken at the 
earliest possible opportunity and, in all cases where issues are settled, at or before such settlement unless the ground of 
objection has subsequently arisen, and any such objection to so taken shall be deemed to have been waived. 
ORDER III- RECOGNIZED AGENTS AND PLEADERS 
1. Appearances, etc., may be in person, by recognized agent or by pleader— Any appearance, application or 
act in or to any Court, required or authorized by law to be made or done by a party in such Court, may, 
except where otherwise expressly provided by any law for the time being in force, be made or done by the 
party in person, or by his recognized agent, or by a pleader appearing, applying or acting, as the case may 
be, on his behalf: 
Provide that any such appearance shall, if the Court so directs, be made by the party in person. 
2. Recognized agent— The recognized agent of parties by whom such appearances, applications and acts 
may be made or done are— 
(a) persons holding powers-of-attorney, authorizing them to make and do such appearances, applications 
and acts on behalf of such parties; 
(b) persons carrying on trade or business for and in the names of parties not resident within the local limits of 
the jurisdiction of the Court within which limits the appearance, application or act is made or done, in matters 
connected with such trade or business only, where no other agent is expressly authorized to make and do 
such appearances, applications and acts. 
3. Service of process on recognized agent— (1) Process served on the recognized agent of a party shall be 
as effectual as if the same had been served on the party in person, unless the Court otherwise directs. 
(2) The provisions for the service of process on a party to a suit shall apply to the service of process on his 
recognized agent. 
4. Appointment of pleader— (1) No pleader shall act for any person in any Court, unless he has been 
appointed for the purpose by such person by a document in writing signed by such person or by his 
recognized agent or by some other person duly authorized by or under a power-of-attorney to make such 
appointment. 
(2) Every such appointment shall be [120][filed in Court and shall, for the purposes of sub-rule(1), be] 
deemed to be in force until determined with the leave of the Court by a writing singed by the client or the 
pleader, as the case may be, and filed in Court, or until the client or the pleader dies, or until all proceedings 
in the suit are ended so far as regards the client. 
[121] [Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-rule, the following shall be deemed to be proceedings in 
the suit,— 
(a) an application for the review of decree or order in the suit, 
(b) an application under section 144 or under section 152 of this Code, in relation to any decree or order 
made in the suit, 
49

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) an appeal from any decree or order in the suit, and 
(d) any application or act for the purpose of obtaining copies of documents or return of documents produced 
or filed in the suit or of obtaining refund of moneys paid into the Court in connection with the suit.] 
[122] [(3) Nothing in sub-rule (2) shall be construed— 
(a) as extending, as between the pleader and his client, the duration for which the pleader is engaged, or 
(b) as authorising service on the pleader of any notice or document issued by any Court other than the Court 
for which the pleader was engaged, except where such service was expressly agreed to by the client in the 
document referred in in sub-rule (1)]. 
(4) The High Court may, by general order, direct that, where the person by whom a pleader is appointed is 
unable to write his name, his mark upon the document appointing the pleader shall be attested by such 
person and in such manner as may be specified by the order. 
(5) No pleader who has been engaged for the purpose of pleading only shall plead on behalf of any party, 
unless he has filed in Court a memorandum of appearance signed by himself and stating— 
(a) the names of the parties to the suit, 
(b) the name of the party for whom he appears, and 
(c) the name of the person by whom he is authorized to appear : 
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall apply to any pleader engaged to plead on behalf of any party by 
any other pleader who has been duly appointed to act in Court on behalf of such party. 
5. Service of process on pleader— [123][Any process served on the pleader who has been duly appointed to 
act in Court for any party] or left at the office or ordinary residence of such pleader, and whether the same is 
for the personal appearance of the party or not, shall be presumed to be duly communicated and made 
known to the party whom the pleader represents, and, unless the Court otherwise directs, shall be as 
effectual for all purposes as if the same had been given to or served on the party in person. 
6. Agent to accept service— (1) Besides the recognized agents described in rule 2 any person residing 
within the jurisdiction of the Court may be appointed an agent to accept service of process. 
(2) Appointment to be in writing and to be filed in Court—Such appointment may be special or general and 
shall be made by a instrument in writing signed by the principal, and such instrument or, if the appointment is 
general, a certified copy thereof shall be filed in Court. 
[124] [(3)The Court may, at any stage of the suit, order any party to the suit not having a recognised agent 
residing within the jurisdiction of the Court, or a pleader who has been duly appointed to act in the Court on 
his behalf, to appoint, within a specified time, an agent residing within the jurisdiction of the Court to accept 
service of the procession his behalf.] 
ORDER IV-INSTITUTION OF SUITS 
1. Suit to be commenced by plaint— (1) Every suit shall be instituted by presenting a plaint to the Court or 
such officer as it appoints in this behalf. 
(2) Every plaint shall comply with the rules contained in Orders VI and VII, so far as they are applicable. 
2. Register of suits— The Court shall cause the particulars of every suit to be entered in a book to be kept for 
the purposes and called the resister of civil suits. Such entries shall be numbered in every year according to 
the order in which the plaints are admitted. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh after Order IV, the following Order shall be 
inserted:— 
ORDER IVA 
CONSOLIDATION OF CASES 
50

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Consolidation of suits and proceedings— When two or more suits or proceedings are pending in the same 
Court, and the Court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interest of justice, it may by order direct their joint 
trial, where upon all such suits and proceedings may be decided upon the evidence in all or any of such suits 
or proceedings.". 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976]. 
ORDER V-ISSUE AND SERVICE OF SUMMONS 
Issue of Summons 
1. Summons— (1)When a suit has been duly instituted a summons may be issued to the defendant to 
appear and answer the claim on a day to be therein specified: 
Provided that no such summons shall be issued when the defendant has appeared at the presentation of the 
plaint and admitted the plaintiff's claim : 
[125][Provided further that where a summons has been issued, the Court may direct the defendant to file the 
written statement of his defence, if any, on the date of his appearance and cause an entry to be made to that 
effect in the summons.] 
(2) A defendant to whom a summons has been issued under sub-rule (1) may appear— 
(a) in person, or 
(b) by a pleader duly instructed and able to answer all material questions relating to the suit, or 
(c) by a pleader accompanied by some person able to answer all such questions. 
(3) Every such summons shall be signed by the Judge or such officer as he appoints, and shall be sealed 
with the seal of the Court. 
2. Copy or statement annexed to summons— Every summons shall be accompanied by a copy of the plaint 
or, if so permitted, by a concise statement. 
3. Court may order defendant or plaintiff to appear in person— (1) where the Court sees reason to require 
the personal appearance of the defendant, the summons shall order him to appear in person in Court on the 
day therein specified. 
(2) Where the Court sees reason to require the personal appearance of the plaintiff on the same day, it shall 
make an order for such appearance. 
4. No party to be ordered to appear in person unless resident with certain limits— No party shall be ordered 
to appear in person unless he resides— 
(a) within the local limits of the Court's ordinary original jurisdiction, or 
(b) without such limits but at place less than fifty or (where there is railway or steamer communication or 
other established public conveyance for five-sixths of the distance between the place where he resides and 
the place where the Court is situate) less than two hundred miles distance from the Court-house. 
5. Summons to be either to settle issues or for final disposal— The Court shall determine, at the time of 
issuing the summons, whether it shall be for the settlement of issues only, or for the final disposal of the suit; 
and the summons shall contain a direction accordingly : 
Provided that, in every suit heard by a Court of Small Causes, the summons shall be for the final disposal of 
the suit. 
6. Fixing day for appearance of defendant— The day for the appearance of the defendant shall be fixed with 
reference to the current business of the Court, the place of residence of the defendant and the time 
necessary for the service of the summons; and the day shall be so fixed as to allow the defendant sufficient 
time to enable him to appear and answer on such day. 
7. Summons to order defendant to produce documents relied on by him— The summons to appeal and 
answer shall order the defendant to produce all documents in his possession or power upon which he 
intends to rely in support of his case. 
51

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
8. On issue of summons for final disposal, defendant to be directed to produce his witnesses— Where the 
summons is for the final disposal of the suit, it shall also direct the defendant to produce, on the day fixed for 
his appearance, all witnesses upon whose evidence he intends to relay in support of his case. 
Service of Summons 
9. Delivery or transmission of summons for service— (1) Where the defendant resides within the jurisdiction 
of the Court in which the suit is instituted, or has an agent resident within that jurisdiction who is empowered 
to accept the service of the summons, the summons shall, unless the Court otherwise directs, be delivered 
or sent to the proper officer to be served by him or one of his subordinates. 
(2) The proper officer may be an officer of a Court other than that in which the suit is instituted, and, where 
he is such an officer, the summons may be sent to him by post or in such other manner as the Court may 
direct. 
10. Mode of service— Service of the summons shall be made by delivering or tendering a copy thereof 
signed by the Judge or such officer as he appoints in this behalf, and sealed with the seal of the Court. 
11. Service on several defendants— Save as otherwise prescribed, where there are more defendants than 
one, service of the summons shall be made on each defendant. 
12. Service to be on defendant on person when practicable, or on his agent— Wherever it is practicable 
service shall be made on the defendant in person, unless he has an agent empowered to accept service, in 
which case service on such agent shall be sufficient. 
13. Service on agent by whom defendant carries on business— (1) In a suit relating to any business or work 
against a person who does not reside within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court from which the 
summons is issued, service on any manager or agent, who, at the time of service, personally carries on such 
business or work for such person within such limits, shall be deemed good service. 
(2) For the purpose of this rule the master of a ship shall be deemed to be the agent of the owner or 
chartered. 
14. Service on agent in charge in suits for immovable property— Where in a suit to obtain relief respecting, 
or compensation for wrong to, immovable property, service cannot be made on the defendant in person, and 
the defendant has no agent empowered to accept the service, it may be made on any agent of the defendant 
in charge of the property. 
[126][15. Where service may be on an adult member of defendant's family— Where in a suit the defendant is 
absent from his residence at the time when the service of summons is sought to be effected on his at his 
residence and there is no likelihood of his being found at the residence within a reasonable time and he has 
no agent empowered to accept service of the summons on his behalf service may be made on any adult 
member of the family, whether male or female, who is residing with him. 
Explanation.—A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this rule.] 
16. Person served to sign acknowledgement— Where the serving officer delivers or tenders a copy of the 
summons to the defendant personally, or to an agent or other person on his behalf, he shall require the 
signature of the person to whom the copy is so delivered or tendered to an acknowledgement of service 
endorsed on the original summons. 
17. Procedure when defendant refuses to accept service, or cannot be found— Where the defendant or his 
agent or such other person as aforesaid refuses to sign the acknowledgement, or where the serving officer, 
after using all due and reasonable diligence, cannot find the defendant, [127][who is absent from his 
residence at the time when service is sought to be effected on him at his residence and there is no likelihood 
of his being found at the residence within a reasonable time] and there is no agent empowered to accept 
service of the summons on his behalf, nor any other person on whom service can be made, the serving 
officer shall affix a copy of the summons on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the house in 
which the defendant ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain, and shall then 
return the original to the Court from which it was issued, with a report endorsed thereon or annexed thereto 
stating that he has so affixed the copy, the circumstances under which he did do, and the name and address 
of the person (if any) by whom the house was identified and in whose presence the copy was affixed. 
52

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18. Endorsement of time and manner of service— The serving officer shall, in all cases in which the 
summons has been served under rule 16, endorse or annex, or cause to be endorsed or annexed, on or to 
the original summons, a return stating the time when and the manner in which the summons was served, 
and the name and address of the person (if any) identifying the person served and witnessing the delivery or 
tender of the summons. 
19. Examination of serving officer.— Where a summons is returned under rule 17, the Court shall, if the 
return under that rule has not been verified by the affidavit of the serving officer, and may, if it has been so 
verified, examine the serving officer on oath, or cause him to be so examined by another Court, touching his 
proceedings, and may make such further enquiry in the matter as it thinks fit; and shall either declare that the 
summons has been duly served or order such service as it thinks fit. 
[128][19A. Simultaneous issue of summons for service by post in addition to personal service— (1) The 
Court shall, in addition to, and simultaneously with, the issue of summons for service in the manner provided 
in rules 9 to 19 (both inclusive), also direct the summons to be served by registered post, acknowledgement 
due, addressed to the defendant, or his agent empowered to accept the service, at the place where the 
defendant, or his agent, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall require the Court to issue a summons for service by registered 
post, where, in the circumstances of the case, the Court considers it unnecessary. 
(2) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the defendant or his agent is received by the 
Court or the postal article containing the summons is received back by the Court with an endorsement 
purporting to have been made by a postal employee to the effect that the defendant or his agent had refused 
to take delivery of the postal article containing the summons, when tendered to him, the Court issuing the 
summons shall declare that the summons had been duly served on the defendant : 
Provided that where the summons was properly addressed, prepaid and duly sent by registered post, 
acknowledgement due, the declaration referred to in this sub-rule shall be made notwithstanding the fact that 
the acknowledgement having lost or mislaid, or for other reason, has been received by the Court within thirty 
days from the date of the issue of the summons]. 
20. Substituted service— (1) Where the Court is satisfied that there is preason to believe that the defendant 
is keeping out of the way for the purpose of avoiding service, or that for any other reason the summons 
cannot be served in the ordinary way, the Court shall order the summons to be served by affixing a copy 
thereof in some conspicuous place in the Court-house, and also upon some conspicuous part of the house (if 
any) in which the defendant is known to have last resided or carried on business or personally worked for 
gain, or in such other manner as the Court thinks fit. 
[129][(1A) Where the Court acting under sub-rule (1) orders service by an advertisement in a newspaper, the 
newspaper shall be a daily newspaper circulating in the locality in which the defendant is last known to have 
actually and voluntarily resided, carried on business or personally worked for gain.] 
(2) Effect of substituted service—Service substituted by order of the Court shall be as effectual as if it had 
been made on the defendant personally. 
(3) Where service substituted, time for appearance to be fixed—Where service is substituted by order of the 
Court, the Court shall fix such time for the appearance of the defendant as the case may require. 
20A. [Service of summons by post.] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 ( 104 of 
1976), s. 55 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
21. Service of summons where defendant resides within jurisdiction of another Court— A summons may sent 
by the Court by which it is issued, whether within or without the State, either by one of its officers or by post 
to any Court (not being the High Court) having jurisdiction in the place where the defendant resides. 
22. Service within presidency-towns of summons issued by Courts outside— Where as summons issued by 
any Court established beyond the limits of the towns of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay is to be served within 
any such limits, it shall be sent to the Court of Small Causes within whose jurisdiction it is to be served. 
23. Duty of Court to which summons is sent— The Court to which a summons is sent under rule 21 or rule 
22 shall, upon receipt thereof, proceed as if it had been issued by such Court and shall then return the 
summons to the Court of issue, together with the record (if any) of its proceedings with regard thereto. 
53

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24. Service on defendant in prison— Where the defendant is confined in a prison, the summons shall be 
delivered or sent by post or otherwise to the officer in charge of the prison for service on the defendant. 
25. Service where defendant resides out of India and has no agent— Where the defendant resides out of 
India and has no agent in India empowered to accept service, the summons shall be addressed to the 
defendant at the place where he is residing and sent to him by post, if there is postal communication 
between such place and the place where the Court is situate : 
Provided that where any such defendant [130][resides in Bangladesh or Pakistan] the summons, together 
with a copy thereof, may be sent for service on the defendant, to any Court in that country (not being the 
High Court) having jurisdiction in the place where the defendant resides: 
Provided further that where any such defendant is a public officer [131][in Bangladesh or Pakistan (not 
belonging to the Bangladesh or, as the case may be, Pakistan military naval or air forces)] or is servant of a 
railway company or local authority in that country, the summons, together with a copy thereof, may be sent 
for service on the defendant, to such officer or authority in that country as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf. 
[132][26. Service in foreign territory through Political Agent or Court— Where— 
(a) in the exercise of any foreign jurisdiction vested in the Central Government, a Political Agent has been 
appointed, or a Court has been established or continued, with power to serve a summons, issued by a Court 
under this code, in any foreign territory in which the defendant actually and voluntarily resides, caries on 
business or personally works for gain, or 
(b) the Central Government has, by notification in the Official Gazette, declared, in respect of any Court 
situate in any such territory and not established or continued in the exercise of any such jurisdiction as 
aforesaid, that service by such Court of any summons issued by a Court under this Code shall be deemed to 
be vaild service, 
the summons may be sent to such Political Agent or Court, by post, or otherwise, or if so directed by the 
Central Government, through the Ministry of that Government dealing with foreign affairs, or in such other 
manner as may be specified by the Central Government for the purpose of being served upon the defendant 
: and, if the Political Agent or Court returns the summons with an endorsement purporting to have been 
made by such Political Agent or by the Judge or other officer of the Court to the effect that the summons has 
been served on the defendant in the manner hereinbefore directed, such endorsement shall be deemed to 
be evidence of service. 
26A. Summonses to be sent to officer to foreign countries— Where the Central Government has, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declared in respect of any foreign territory that summonses to be served 
on defendants actually and voluntarily residing or carrying on business or personally working for gain in that 
foreign territory may be sent to an officer of the Government of the the foreign territory specified by the 
Central Government, the summonses may be sent to such officer, through the Ministry of the Government of 
India dealing with foreign affairs or in such other manner as may be specified by the Central Government; 
and if such officer returns any such summons with an endorsement purporting to have been made by him 
that the summons has been served on the defendant, such endorsement shall be deemed to be evidence of 
service.] 
27. Service on civil public or on servant of railway officer or on servant of railway company or local 
authority— Where the defendant is a public officer (not belonging to the Indian military naval or air forces, or 
is the servant of a railway company or local authority, the Court may, if it appears to it that the summons may 
be most conveniently so served, send it for service on the defendant to the head of the office in which he is 
ememployed together with a copy to be retained by the defendant. 
28. Service on soldiers, sailors or airmen— Where the defendant is a soldier, sailor or airman, the Court shall 
send the summons for service to his commanding officer together with a copy to be retained by the 
defendant. 
29. Duty of person to whom summons is delivered or sent for service— (1) Where a summons is delivered or 
sent to any person for service under rule 24, rule 27 or rule 28, such person shall be bound to serve it if 
possible and to return it under his signature, with the written acknowledgement of the defendant, and such 
signature shall be deemed to be evidence of service. 
54

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Where from any cause service is impossible, the summons shall be returned to the Court with a full 
statement of such cause and of the steps taken to procure service, and such statement shall be deemed to 
be evidence of non-service. 
30. Substitution of letter for summons— (1) The Court may, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore 
contained, substitute for a summons a letter signed by the Judge or such officer as he may appoint in this 
behalf, where the defendant is, in the opinion of the Court, of a rank entitling him to such mark of 
consideration. 
(2) A letter substituted under sub-rule (1) shall contain all the particulars required to be stated in a summons, 
and, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (3), shall be treated in all respects as a summons. 
(3) A letter so substituted may be sent to the defendant by spot or by a special messenger selected by the 
Court, or in any other manner which the Court thinks fit; and where the defendant has an agent empowered 
to accept service, the letter may be delivered or sent to such agent. 
ORDER VI-PLEADINGS GENERALLY 
1. Pleading— "Pleading", shall mean plaint or written statement. 
[133][2. Pleading to state material facts and not evidence— (1) Every pleading shall contain, and contain 
only a statement in a concise form of the material facts on which the party pleading relies for his claim or 
defnece as the case may be, but not the evidence by which they are to be proved. 
(2) Every pleading shall, when necessary, be devided into paragraphs, numbered consecutively, each 
allegation being, so far as is convenient, contained in a separate paragraph. 
(3) Dates, sums and numbers shall be expressed in a pleading in figures as well as in words.] 
3. Forms of pleading— The forms in Appendix A when applicable, and where they are not applicable forms 
of the like character, nearly as may be, shall be used for all pleadings. 
4. Particulars to be given where necessary— In all cases in which the party pleading relies on any 
misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful default, or undue influence, and in all other cases in which 
particulars may be necessary beyond such as are exemplified in the forms aforesaid, particulars (with dates 
and items if necessary) shall be stated in the pleading. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Madhya Pradesh.— After rule 4, the following rule shall be inserted, namely:— 
"4-A. Particulars of pleading for agricultural land.— In any suit or proceeding contemplated under rule 3-B of 
Order 1, the parties, other than the State Government, shall plead the particulars of total agricultural land 
which is owned, claimed or held by them in any right and shall further declare whether the subject-matter of 
suit or proceeding is or is not covered by Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1960 (20 of 
1960), and whether any proceedings in relation to such subject-matter are to the knowledge of the party 
pending before the competent authority." 
[M.P. Act 29 of 1984] 
5. Further and better statement, or particulars— A further and better statement of the nature of the claim or 
defence, or further and better particulars of any matter stated in any pleading, may in all cases be ordered, 
upon such terms, as to costs and otherwise, as may be just. 
6. Condition precedent— Any condition precedent, the performance or occurrence of which is intended to be 
contested, shall be distinctly specified in his pleading by the plaintiff or defendant, as the case my be; and, 
subject thereto, an avernment of the performance or occurrence of all conditions precedent necessary for the 
case of the plaintiff or defendant shall be implied in his pleading. 
7. Departure— No pleading shall, except by way of amendment, raise any new ground of claim or contain 
any allegation of fact inconsistent with the previous pleadings of the party pleading the same. 
8. Denial of contract— Where a contract is alleged in any pleading, a bare denial of the same by the opposite 
party shall be construed only as a denial in fact of the express contract alleged or of the matters of fact from 
which the same may be implied and not as a denial of the legality or sufficiency in law of such contract. 
55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
9. Effect of document to be stated.— Wherever the contents of any document are material, it shall be 
sufficient in any pleading to state the effect thereof as briefly as possible, without setting out the whole or any 
part thereof, unless the precise words of the document or any part thereof are material. 
10. Malice, knowledge, etc.,— Wherever it is material to allege malice, fraudulent intention, knowledge or 
other condition of the mind of any person, it shall be sufficient to allege the same as a fact without setting out 
the circumstances from which the same is to be inferred. 
11. Notice— Wherever it is material to allege notice to any person of any fact, mater or thing, it shall be 
sufficient to allege such notice as a fact, unless the form or the precise terms of such notice, or the 
circumstances from which such notice is to be inferred are material. 
12. Implied contract, or relation— Wherever any contract or any relation between any persons is to be 
implied from a series of letters or conversations or otherwise from a number of circumstances it shall be 
sufficient to allege such contract or relation as a fact, and to refer generally to such letter, conversations or 
circumstances without setting them out in detail. And if in such case the person so pleading desires to rely in 
the alternative upon more contracts or relations than one as to be implied from such circumstances, he may 
state the same in the alternative. 
13. Presumptions of law— Neither party need in any pleading allege any matter of fact which the law 
presumes in his favour or as to which the burden of proof lies upon the other side unless the same has first 
been specifically denied (e.g. consideration for a bill of exchange where the plaintiff sues only on the bill and 
not for the consideration as a substantive ground of claim.) 
14. Pleading to be signed— Every pleading shall be signed by the party and his pleader (if any) : 
Provided that where a party pleading is, by reason of absence or for other good cause, unable to sign the 
pleading it may be signed by any person duly authorized by him to sign the same or to sue or defend on his 
behalf. 
[134][14A. Address for service of notice— (1) Every pleading, when filed by a party, shall be accompanied by 
a statement in the prescribed form, signed as provided in rule 14, regarding the address of the party. 
(2) Such address may, from time to time, be changed by lodging in Court a form duly filled up and stating the 
new address of the party and accompanied by a verified petition. 
(3) The address furnished in the statement made sub-rule (1) shall be called the "registered address" of the 
party, and shall, until duly changed as aforesaid, be deemed to be the address of the party for the purpose of 
service of all processes in the suit of in any appeal from any decree or order therein made and for the 
purpose of execution, and shall hold good, subject as aforesaid, for a period of two years after the final 
determination of the cause or matter. 
(4) Service of any process may be effected upon a party at his registered address in all respects as though 
such party resided there at. 
(5) Where the registered address of a party is discovered by the court to be incomplete, false or fictitious, the 
Court may, either on its own motion, or on the application of any party, order— 
(a) in the case where such registered address was furnished by a plaintiff, stay of the suit, or 
(b) in the case where such registered address was furnished by a defendant, his be struck out and he be 
placed in the same position as if he had not put up and defence. 
(6) Where a suit is stayed or a defence is struck out under sub- rule (5), the plaintiff or, as the case may be, 
the defendant may, after furnishing his true address, apply to the Court for an order to set aside the order of 
stay or, as the case may be, the order striking out the defence. 
(7) the Court, if satisfied that the party was prevented by any sufficient cause from filing the true address at 
the proper time, shall set aside the order of stay or order striking out the defence, on such term as to costs or 
otherwise as it thinks fit and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit or defence, as the case may be. 
(8) Nothing in this rule shall prevent the Court from directing the service of a process at any other address, if, 
for any reason, it thinks fit to do so.] 
56

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. Verification of pleadings— (1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, every 
pleading shall be varied at the foot by the party or by one of the parties pleading or by some other person 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case. 
(2) The person verifying shall specify, by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the pleading, what he 
verifies of his own knowledge and what he verifies upon information received and believed to be true. 
(3) The verification shall be signed by the person making it and shall state the date on which and the place at 
which it was signed. 
[135][16. Striking out pleadings— The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order to be struck out or 
amended any matter in any pleading— 
(a) which may be unnecessary, scandalous, frivolous or vexatious, or 
(b) which may tend to prejudice, embarrass or delay the fair trail of the suit, or 
(c) which is otherwise an abuse of the process of the Court.] 
17. Amendment of pleadings— The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow either party to alter or 
amend his pleadings in such manner and on such terms as may be just, and all such amendments shall be 
made as may be necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in controversy between the 
parties. 
18. Failure to amend after order— If a party who has obtained an order for leave to amend does not amend 
accordingly within the time limited for that purpose by the order, or if no time is thereby limited then within 
fourteen days from the date of the order, he shall not be permitted to amend after the expiration of such 
limited time as aforesaid or of such fourteen days, as the case may be, unless the time is extended by the 
Court. 
ORDER VII- PLAINT 
1. Particulars to be contained in plaint— The plaint shall contain the following particulars:— 
(a) the name of the Court in which the suit is brought ; 
(b) the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff; 
(c) the name, description and place of residence of the defendant, so far as they can be ascertained; 
(d) where the plaintiff or the defendant is a minor or a person of unsound mind, a statement to that effect; 
(e) the facts constituting the cause of action and when it arose; 
(f) the facts showing that the Court has jurisdiction; 
(g) the relief which the plaintiff claims; 
(h) where the plaintiff has allowed a set-off or relinquished a portion of his claim, the amount so allowed or 
relinquished; and 
(i) a statement of the value of the subject-matter of the suit for the purposes of jurisdiction and of court fees, 
so far as the case admits. 
2. In money suits— Where the plaintiff seeks the recovery of money, the plaint shall state the precise amount 
claimed: 
But where the plaintiff sue for mesne profits, or for an amount which will be found due to him on taking 
unsettled accounts between him and the defendant, [136][or for movables in the possession of the 
defendant, or for debts of which the value he cannot, after the exercise of reasonable diligence, estimate, the 
plaint shall state approximately the amount or value sued for]. 
3. Where the subject-matter of the suit is immovable property— Where the subject-matter of the suit is 
immovable property, the plaint shall contain a description of the property sufficient to identify it, and, in case 
such property can be identified by boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement or survey, the plaint shall 
specify such boundaries or numbers. 
57

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. When plaintiff sues as representative— Where the plaintiff sues in a representative character the plaint 
shall show not only that he has an actual existing interest in the subject- matter, but that he has taken the 
steps (if any) necessary to enable him to institute a suit concerning it. 
5. Defendant's interest and liability to be shown— The plaint shall show that the defendant is or claims to be 
interested in subject-matter, and that he is liable to be called upon to answer the plaintiff's demand. 
6. Grounds of exemption from limitation law— Where the suit is instituted after the expiration of the period 
prescribed by the law of limitation, the plaint shall show the ground upon which exemption from such law is 
claimed : 
[137] [Provided that the Court may permit the plaintiff to claim exemption from the law of limitation on any 
ground not set out in the plaint, if such ground is not inconsistent with the grounds set out in the plaint.] 
7. Relief to be specifically stated— Every plaint shall state specifically the relief which the plaintiff claims 
either simply or in the alternative, and it shall not be necessary to ask for general or other relief which may 
always be given as the Court may think just to the same extent as if it had been asked for. And the same rule 
shall apply to any relief claimed by the defendant in his written statement. 
8. Relief founded on separate ground— Where the plaintiff seeks relief in respect of several distinct claims or 
causes of action founded upon separate and district grounds, they shall be stated as far as may be 
separately and distinctly. 
9. Procedure on admitting plaint— concise statement—(1) The plaintiff shall endorse on the pliant, or annex 
thereto, a list of the documents (if any) which he has produced along with it; and , if the plaint is admitted 
[138][shall present, within such time as may be fixed by the Court or extended by it from time to time, as 
many copies] on plain paper of the plaint as there are defendants, unless the Court by reason of the length of 
the plaint or the number of the defendants, or for any other sufficient reason, permits him present a like 
number of concise statements of the nature of the claim made, or of the relief claimed in the suit, in which 
case he shall present such statements. 
[139] [(1A) The plaintiff shall, within the time fixed by the Court or extended by it under sub-rule (1), pay the 
requisite fee for the service of summons on the defendants.] 
(2) Where the plaintiff sue or the defendant or any of the defendants is sued, in a representative capacity 
such statements shall show in what capacity the plaintiff or defendant sues or is sued. 
(3) The plaintiff may, by leave of the Court, amend such statements so as to make them correspond with the 
plaint. 
(4) The chief ministerial officer of the Court shall sign such list and copies or statements if, on examination, 
he finds them to be correct. 
[140][10. Return of plaint— (1) [141][Subject to the provisions of rule 10A, the plaint shall] at any state of the 
suit be returned to be presented to the Court in which the suit should have been instituted. 
[142][Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that a Court of appeal or revision may 
direct, after setting aside the decree passed in a suit, the return of the plaint under this sub-rule.] 
(2) procedure on returning plaint—On returning a plaint, the Judge shall endorse thereon the date of its 
presentation and return, the name of the party presenting it, and a brief statement of the reasons for 
returning it. 
[143][10A. Power of Court to fix a date of appearance in the Court where plaint is to be filed after its return— 
(1) Where, in any suit, after the defendant has appeared, the Court is of opinion that the plaint should be 
returned, it shall, before doing, so, intimate its decision to the plaintiff. 
(2) Where an intimation is given to the plaintiff under sub-rule (1), the plaintiff may make an application to the 
Court— 
(a) specifying the Court in which he proposes to present the plaint after its return, 
(b) praying that the Court may fix a date for the appearance of the parties in the said Court, and 
(c) requesting that the notice of the date so fixed may be given to him and to the defendant. 
58

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) Where an application is made by the plaintiff under sub-rule (2), the Court shall, before returning the 
plaint and notwithstanding that the order for return of plaint was made by it on the ground that it has no 
jurisdiction to try the suit,— 
(a) fix a date for the appearance of the parties in the Court in which the plaint is proposed to be presented, 
and 
(b) give to the plaintiff and to the defendant notice of such date for appearance. 
(4) Where the notice of the date for appearance is given under sub-rule (3),— 
(a) it shall not be necessary for the Court in which the plaint is presented after its return, to serve the 
defendant with a summons for appearance in the suit, unless that Court, for reasons to be recorded 
otherwise directs, and 
(b) the said notice shall be deemed to be a summons for the appearance of the defendant in the Court in 
which the plaint is presented on the date so fixed by the Court by which the plaint was returned. 
(5) Where the application made by the plaintiff under sub-rule (2) is allowed by the Court, the plaintiff shall 
not be entitled to appeal against the order returning the plaint. 
10B. Power of appellate Court to transfer suit to the proper Court— (1) Where, on an appeal against an order 
for the return of plaint, the Court hearing the appeal confirms such order, the Court of appeal may, if the 
plaintiff by an application so desires, while returning the plaint, direct plaintiff to file the plaint, subject to the 
provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), in the Court in which the suit should have been instituted, 
(whether such Court is within or without the State in which the Court hearing the appeal is situated), and fit a 
date for the appearance of the parties in the Court in which the plaint is directed to be filed and when the 
date is so fixed it shall not be necessary for the Court in which the plaint is filed to serve the defendant with 
the summons for appearance in the suit, unless that Court in which the plaint is filed, for reasons to be 
recorded, otherwise directs. 
(2) The direction made by the Court under sub-rule (1), shall be without any prejudice to the rights of the 
parties to question the jurisdiction of the Court, in which the plaint is filed, to try the suit.] 
11. Rejection of plaint— The plaint shall be rejected in the following cases:— 
(a) where it does not disclose a cause of action; 
(b) where the relief claimed is undervalued, and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to correct the 
valuation within a time to be fixed by the Court, fails to do so; 
(c) where the relief claimed is properly valued, but the plaint is returned upon paper insufficiently stamped, 
and the plaintiff, on being required by the Court to supply the requisite stamp-paper within a time to be fixed 
by the Court, fails to do so; 
(d) where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law : 
[144] [Provided that the time fixed by the Court for the correction of the valuation or supplying of the requisite 
stamp-paper shall not be extended unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, is satisfied that the plaintiff 
was prevented by any cause of an exceptional nature form correcting the valuation or supplying the requisite 
stamp-paper , as the case may be, within the time fixed by the Court and that refusal to extend such time 
would cause grave injustice to the plaintiff.] 
12. Procedure on rejecting plaint— Where a plaint is rejected the Judge shall record an order to that effect 
with the reasons for such order. 
13. Where rejection of plaint does not preclude presentation of fresh plaint— The rejection of the plaint on 
any of the grounds herein before mentioned shall not of its own force preclude the plaintiff from presenting a 
fresh plaint in respect of the same cause of action. 
Documents relied on in plaint 
14. Production of document on which plaintiff sues— (1) Where a plaintiff sues upon a document in his 
possession or power, he shall produce it in Court when the plaint is presented, and shall at the same time 
deliver the document or a copy thereof to be filed with the plaint. 
59

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(2) List of other documents—Where he relies on any other documents (whether in his possession or power 
or not) as evidence in support of his claim, he shall enter such documents in a list to be added or annexed to 
the plaint. 
15. Statement in case of documents not in plaintiff's possession or power— Where any such document is not 
in the possession or power of the plaintiff, he shall, if possible, state in whose possession or power it is. 
16. Suits on lost negotiable instruments— Where the suit is founded upon a negotiable instrument, and it is 
proved that the instrument is lost, and an indemnity is given by the plaintiff, to the satisfaction of the Court, 
against the claims of any other person upon such instrument, the Court may pass such decree as it would 
have passed if the plaintiff had produced the instrument in Court when the plaint was presented, and had at 
the same time delivered a copy of the instrument to be filed with the plaint. 
17. Production of shop-book— (1) Save in so far as is otherwise provided by the Bankers' Books Evidence 
Act, 1891 (18 of 1891), where the document on which the plaintiff sues is an entry in shop-book or other 
account in his possession or power the plaintiff shall produce the book or account at the time of filing the 
plaint, together with a copy of the entry on which he relies. 
(2) Original entry to be marked and returned—The Court, or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall 
forthwith mark the document for the purpose of identification, and, after examining and comparing the copy 
with the original, shall, if it is found correct, certify it to be so and return the book to the plaintiff and cause the 
copy to be filed. 
18. Inadmissibility of document not produced when plaint filed— (1) A document which ought to be produced 
in Court by the plaintiff when the plaint is presented, or to be entered in the list to be added or annexed to the 
plaint, and which is not produced or entered accordingly, shall not, without the leave of the Court, be 
received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit. 
(2) Nothing in this rule applies to documents produced for cross-examination of the defendant's witnesses or 
in answer to any case set up by the defendant or handed to a witness merely to refresh his memory 
ORDER VIII- [145][WRITTEN STATEMENT, SET-OF AND COUNTER- CLAIM] 
1. Written statement— [146][(1)] The defendant [147]****shall, at or before the first hearing or within such 
time as the Court may permit, present a written statement of his defence. 
[148] [(2) Save as otherwise provided in rule 8A, where the defendant relies on any document (whether or 
not in his possession or power) in support of his defence or claim for set-off or counter claim, he shall enter 
such documents in a list, and shall, — 
(a) If a written statement is presented, annex the list to the written statement : 
Provided that where the defendant, in his written statement, claims a set-off or makes a counter-claim based 
on a document in his possession or power, he shall produce it in Court at the time of presentation of the 
written statement and shall at the same time deliver the document or copy thereof to be filed with the written 
statement; 
(b) If a written statement is not presented, present the list to the Court at the first hearing of the suit. 
(3) Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the defendant, he shall, wherever 
possible, state in whose possession or power it is. 
(4) If no such list is so annexed or presented, the defendant shall be allowed such further period for the 
purpose as the Court may think fit. 
(5) A document which ought to be entered in the list referred to in sub-rule (2), and which is not so entered, 
shall not, without the leave of the Court, be received in evidence on behalf of the defendant at the hearing of 
the suit. 
(6) Nothing in sub-rule (5) shall apply to documents produced for the cross-examination of plaintiff's 
witnesses or in answer to any case set up by the plaintiff subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or handed 
over to a witness merely to refresh his memory. 
60

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(7) Where a Court grants leave under sub-rule (5), it shall record its reasons for so doing and no such leave 
shall be granted unless good cause is shown to the satisfaction of the Court for the non-entry of the 
document in the list referred to in sub-rule (2).] 
2. New facts must be specially pleaded— The defendant must raise by his pleading all matters which show 
the suit not be maintainable, or that the transaction is either void or voidable in point of law, and all such 
grounds of defence as, if not raised, would be likely to take the opposite party by surprise, or would raise 
issues of fact not arising out of the plaint, as, for instance, fraud, limitation, release, payment, performance, 
or facts showing illegality. 
3. Denial to be specific— It shall not be sufficient for a defendant in his written statement to deny generally 
the grounds alleged by the plaintiff, but the defendant must deal specifically with each allegation of fact of 
which he does not admit the truth, except damages. 
4. Evasive denial— Where a defendant denies an allegation of fact in the plaint, he must not do so evasively, 
but answer the point of substance, Thus, if it is alleged that he received a certain sum of money, it shall not 
be sufficient to deny that he received that particular amount, but he must deny that he received that sum or 
any part thereof, or else set out how much he received. And if an allegation is made with diverse 
circumstances, it shall not be sufficient to deny it along with those circumstances. 
5. Specific denial— [149][(1)] Every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied specifically or by necessary 
implication, or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of the defendant, shall be taken to be admitted 
except as against a person under disability : 
Provided that the Court may in it discretion require any fact so admitted to be proved otherwise than by such 
admission. 
[150] [(2) Where the defendant has not filed a pleading, it shall be lawful for the Court to pronounce judgment 
on the basis of the facts contained in the plaint, except as against a person under a disability, but the Court 
may, in its discretion, require any such fact to be proved. 
(3) In exercising its discretion under the proviso to sub-rule (1) or under sub-rule (2), the Court shall have 
due regard to the fact whether the defendant could have, or has, engaged a pleader. 
(4) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, a decree shall be drawn up in accordance with such 
judgment and such decree shall bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.] 
6. Particulars of set-off to be given in written statement— (1) Where in a suit for the recovery of money the 
defendant claims to set-off against the plaintiff's demand any ascertained sum of money legally recoverable 
by him from the plaintiff, not exceeding the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, and both parties fill 
the same character as they fill in the plaintiff's suit, the defendant may, at the first hearing of the suit, but not 
afterwards unless permitted by the Court, presents a written statement containing the particulars of the debt 
sought to be set-off. 
(2) Effect of set-off—The written statement shall have the same effect as a plaint in a cross-suit so as to 
enable the Court to pronounce a final judgment in respect both of the original claim and of the set-off : but 
this shall not affect the lien, upon the amount decreed, of any pleader in respect of the costs payable to him 
under the decree. 
(3) The rules relating to a written statement by a defendant apply to a written statement in answer to a claim 
of set-off. 
Illustrations 
(a) A bequeaths Rs. 2,000 to B and appoints C his executor and residuary legatee. B dies and D takes out 
administration to B's effect, C pays Rs. 1,000 as surety for D: then D sues C for the legacy. C cannot set-off 
the debt of Rs. 1,000 against the legacy, for neither C nor D fills the same character with respect to the 
legacy as they fill with respect to the payment of Rs. 1,000. 
(b) A dies intestate and in debt to B. C takes out administration to A's effects and B buys part of the effects 
from C. In a suit for the purchase-money by C against B, the latter cannot set-off the debt against the price, 
for C fills two different characters, one as the vendor to B, in which he sues B, and the other as 
representative to A. 
61

 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
(c) A sues B on a bill of exchange. B alleges that A has wrongfully neglected to insure B's goods and is liable 
to him in compensation which he claims to set-off. The amount not being ascertained cannot be set-off. 
(d) A sues B on a bill of exchange for Rs. 500. B holds a judgment against A for Rs. 1,000. The two claims 
being both definite, pecuniary demands may be set-off. 
(e) A sues B for compensation on account of trespass. B holds a promissory note for Rs. 1,000 from A and 
claims to set-off that amount against any sum that A may recover in the suit. B may do so, for as soon as A 
recovers, both sums are definite pecuniary demands. 
(f) A and B sue C for Rs. 1,000 C cannot set-off a debt due to him by A alone. 
(g) A sues B and C for Rs. 1000. B cannot set-off a debt due to him alone by A. 
(h) A owes the partnership firm of B and C Rs. 1,000 B dies, leaving C surviving. A sues C for a debt of Rs. 
1,500 due in his separate character. C may set-off the debt of Rs. 1,000. 
[151][6A. Counter-claim by defendant— (1) A defendant in a suit may, in addition to his right of pleading a 
set-off under rule 6, set up, by way of counter-claim against the claim of the plaintiff, any right or claim in 
respect of a cause of action accruing to the defendant against the plaintiff either before or after the filing of 
the suit but before the defendant has delivered his defence or before the time limited for delivering his 
defence has expired. whether such counter-claim is in the nature of a claim for damages or not : 
Provided that such counter-claim shall not exceed the pecuniary limits of the jurisdiction of the Court. 
(2) Such counter-claim shall have the same effect as a cross-suit so as to enable the Court to pronounce a 
final judgment in the same suit, both on the original claim and on the counter-claim. 
(3) The plaintiff shall be at liberty to file a written statement in answer to the counter-claim of the defendant 
within such period as may be fixed by the Court. 
(4) The counter-claim shall be treated as a plaint and governed by the rules applicable to plaints. 
6B. Counter-claim to be stated— Where any defendant seeks to rely upon any ground as supporting a right 
of counter-claim, he shall, in his written statement, state specifically that he does so by way of counter-claim. 
6C. Exclusion of counter-claim— Where a defendant sets up a counter-claim and the plaintiff contends that 
the claim thereby raised ought not to be disposed of by way of counter-claim but in an independent suit, the 
plaintiff may, at any time before issues are settled in relation to the counter-claim, apply to the Court for an 
order that such counter-claim may be excluded, and the Court may, on the hearing of such application make 
such order as it thinks fit. 
6D. Effect of discontinuance of suit— If in any case in which the defendant sets up a counter-claim, the suit 
of the plaintiff is stayed, discontinued or dismissed, the counter-claim may nevertheless be proceeded with. 
6E. Default of plaintiff to reply to counter-claim— If the plaintiff makes default in putting in reply to the 
counter-claim made by the defendant, the Court may pronounce judgment against the plaintiff in relation to 
the counter-claim made against him or make such order in relation to the counter-claim as it thinks fit. 
6F. Relief to defendant where counter-claim succeeds— Where in any suit a set-off or counter-claim is 
established as defence against the plaintiff's claim and any balance is found due to the plaintiff or the 
defendant, as the case may be, the Court may give judgment to the party entitled to such balance. 
6G. Rules relating to written statement to apply— The rules relating to a written statement by a defendant 
shall apply to a written statement filed in answer to a counter-claim.] 
7. Defence or set-off founder upon separate grounds— Where the defendant relies upon several distinct 
grounds of defence or set-off [152][or counter-claim] founded separate and distinct facts, they shall be 
stated, as far as may be, separately and distinctly. 
8. New ground of defence— Any ground of defence which has arisen after the institution of the suit or the 
presentation of a written statement claiming a set-off [153][or counter-claim] may be raised by the defendant 
or plaintiff as the case may be, in his written statement. 
[154][8A. Duty of defendant to produce documents upon which relief is claimed by him— (1)Where a 
defendant bases his defence upon a document in his possession or power, he shall produce it in Court when 
62

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
the written statement is presented by him and shall, at the same time, deliver the document or a copy 
thereof, to be filed with the written statement. 
(2) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the defendant under this rule, but is not so produced, 
shall not, without the leave of the Court, be received in evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit. 
(3) Nothing in this rule shall apply to documents produced,— 
(a) for the cross-examination of the plaintiff's witnesses, or 
(b) in answer to any case setup by the plaintiff subsequent to the filing of the plaint, or 
(c) handed over to a witness merely to refresh him memory]. 
9. Subsequent pleadings— No pleading subsequent to the written statement of a defendant other than by 
way of defence to a set-off [155][or counter-claim] shall be presented except by the leave of the Court and 
upon such terms as the Court thinks fit, but the Court may at any time require a written statement or 
additional written statement from any of the parties and fix a time for presenting the same. 
10. Procedure when party fails to present written statement called for by Court— Where any party from 
whom a written statement [156][is required under rule 1 or 9] fails to present the same within the time 
[157][permitted or fixed by the Court, as the case may be, the Court shall] pronounce judgment against him 
or make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit [158][and on the pronouncement of such judgment, a 
decree shall be drawn up.] 
ORDER IX- APPEARANCE OF PARTIES AND CONSEQUENCE OF NON-APPEARANCE 
1. Parties to appear on day fixed in summons for defendant to appear and answer— On the day fixed in the 
summons for the defendant to appear and answer, the parties shall be in attendance at the Court-house in 
person or by their respective pleaders, and the suit shall then be heard unless the hearing is adjourned to a 
future day fixed by the Court. 
2. Dismissal of suit where summons not served in consequence of plaintiffs failure to pay cost— Where on 
the day so fixed it is found that the summons has not been served upon the defendant in consequence of the 
failure of the plaintiff to pay the court-fee of postal charges (if any) chargeable for such service, [159][or to 
present copies of the plaint or concise statements, as required by rule 9 of order VII,] the Court may make an 
order that the suit be dismissed : 
[160] [Provided that no such order shall be made, if, notwithstanding such failure the defendant attends in 
person (or by agent when he is allowed to appear by agent) on the day fixed for him to appear and answer.] 
3. Where neither party appears, suit to be dismissed— Where neither party appears when the suit is called 
on for hearing, the Court may make an order that the suit be dismissed. 
4. Plaintiff may bring fresh suit or Court may restore suit to file— Where a suit is dismissed under rule 2 or 
rule 3, the plaintiff may (subject to the law of limitation) bring a fresh suit, or he may apply for an order to set 
the dismissal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cause for [161][such failure as is 
referred to in rule 2], or for his non-appearance, as the case may be, the Court shall make an order setting 
aside the dismissal and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit. 
5. Dismissal of suit where plaintiff after summons returned unserved, fails for one month to apply for fresh 
summons— (1) Where after a summons has been issued to the defendant, or to one of several defendants, 
and returned unserved the plaintiff fails, for a periods of [162][one month] from the date of the return made to 
the Court by the officer ordinarily certifying to the Court returns made by the serving officers, to apply for the 
issue of a fresh summons the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed as against such 
defendant, unless the plaintiff has within the said period satisfied the Court that— 
(a) he has failed after using his best endeavours to discover the residence of the defendant, who has not 
been served, or 
(b) such defendant is avoiding service of process, or 
(c) there is any other sufficient cause for extending the time, 
in which case the Court may extend the time for making such application for such period as it thinks fit.] 
63

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) In such case the plaintiff may (subject to the law of limitation) bring a fresh suit. 
6. Procedure when only plaintiff appears— (1) Where the plaintiff appears and the defendant does not 
appear when the suit is called on for hearing, then— 
[163] [(a)] When summons duly served—if it is proved that the summons was duly served, the Court may 
make an order that the suit shall be heard ex parte.] 
(b) When summons not duly served—if it is not proved that the summons was duly serve, the Court shall 
direct a second summons to be issued and served on the defendant; 
(c) When summons served but not in due time—if it is proved that the summons was served on the 
defendant, but not in sufficient time to enable him to appear and answer on the day fixed in the summons, 
the Court shall postpone the hearing of the suit to future day to be fixed by the Court, and shall direct notice 
of such day to be given to the defendant. 
(2) Where it is owing to the plaintiffs' default that the summons was not duly served or was not served in 
sufficient time, the Court shall order the plaintiff to pay the costs occasioned by the postponement. 
7. Procedure where defendant appears on day of adjourned hearing and assigns good cause for previous 
non-appearance— Where the Court has adjourned the hearing of the suit ex-parte and the defendant, at or 
before such hearing, appears and assigns good cause for his previous non-appearance, he may, upon such 
terms as the Court directs as to costs or otherwise, be heard in answer to the suit as if he had appeared on 
the day, fixed for his appearance. 
8. Procedure where defendant only appears— Where the defendant appears and the plaintiff does not 
appear when the suit is called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order that the suit be dismissed, 
unless the defendant admits the claim or part thereof, in which case the Court shall pass a decree against 
the defendant upon such admission, and, where part only of the claim has been admitted, shall dismiss the 
suit so far as it relates to the remainder. 
9. Decree against plaintiff by default bars fresh suit— (1) Where a suit is wholly or partly dismissed under 
rule 8, the plaintiff shall be precluded from bringing a fresh suit in respect of the same cause of action. But he 
may apply for an order to set the dismissal aside, and if he satisfies the Court that there was sufficient cause 
for his non-appearance when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order setting aside 
the dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit. and shall appoint a day for proceeding 
with suit. 
(2) No order shall be made under this rule unless notice of the application has been served on the opposite 
party. 
10. Procedure in case of non-attendance of one or more of several plaintiffs— Where there are more 
plaintiffs than one, and one or more of them appear, and the others do not appear, the Court may, at the 
instance of the plaintiff or plaintiffs appearing, permit the suit to proceed in the same way as if all the plaintiffs 
had appeared, or make such order as it thinks fit. 
11. Procedure in case of non-attendance of one or more of several defendants— Where there are more 
defendants than one, and one or more of them appear, and the others do not appear, the suit shall proceed, 
and the Court shall, at the time of pronouncing judgment, make such order as it thinks fit with respect to the 
defendants who do not appear. 
12. Consequence of non-attendance, without sufficient cause shown, of party ordered to appear in person— 
Where a plaintiff or defendant, who has been ordered to appear in person, does not appear in person, or 
show sufficient cause to the satisfaction of the Court for failing so to appear, he shall be subject to all the 
provisions of the foregoing rules applicable to plaintiffs and defendants, respectively who do no appear. 
Setting aside decrees ex parte 
13. Setting aside decree BIex parte against defendant— In any case in which a decree is passed ex parte 
against a defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree was passed for an order to set it aside; 
and if he satisfies the Court that the summons was not duly served, or that he was prevented by any 
sufficient cause from appearing when the suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order 
64

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
setting aside the decree as against him upon such terms as to costs, payment into Court or otherwise as it 
thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit; 
Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it cannot be set aside as against such defendant only 
it may be set aside as against all or any of the other defendants also: 
[164] [Provided further that no Court shall set aside a decree passed ex parte merely on the ground that 
there has been an irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied that the defendant had notice of the 
date of hearing and had sufficient time to appear and answer the plaintiff's claim] 
[165] [Explanation.—Where there has been an appeal against a decree passed ex parte under this rule, and 
the appeal has been disposed of an any ground other than the ground that the appellant has withdrawn the 
appeal, no application shall lie under this rule for setting aside that ex parte decree.] 
14. No decree to be set aside without notice to opposite party— No decree shall be set aside on any such 
application as aforesaid unless notice thereof has been served on the opposite party. 
ORDER X-EXAMINATION OF PARTIES BY THE COURT 
1. Ascertainment whether allegations in pleadings are admitted or denied— At the first hearing of the suit the 
Court shall ascertain from each party or his pleader whether he admits or denies such allegations of fact as 
are made in the plaint or written statement (if any) of the opposite party, and as are not expressly or by 
necessary implication admitted or denied by the party against whom they are made. The Court shall record 
such admissions and denials. 
[166][2. Oral examination of party, or companion of party— (1) At the first hearing of the suit, the Court— 
(a) shall, with a view to elucidating matters in controversy in the suit examine orally such of the parties to the 
suit appearing in person or present in Court, as it deems fit; and 
(b) may orally examine any person, able to answer any material question relating to the suit, by whom any 
party appearing in person or present in Court or his pleader is accompanied. 
(2) At any subsequent hearing, the Court may orally examine any party appearing in person or present in 
Court, or any person, able to answer any material question relating to the suit, by whom such party or his 
pleader is accompanied. 
(3) The Court may, if it thinks fit, put in the course of an examination under this rule questions suggested by 
either party.] 
3. Substance of examination to be written— The substance of the examination shall be reduced to writing by 
the Judge, and shall form part of the record. 
4. Consequence of refusal or inability of pleader to answer— (1) Where the pleader of any party who 
appears by a pleader or any such person accompanying a pleader as is referred to in rule 2, refuses or is 
unable to answer any material question relating to the suit which the Court is of opinion that the party whom 
he represents ought to answer, and is likely to be able to answer if interrogated in person, the Court may 
postpone the hearing of the suit to a future day and direct that such party shall appear in person on such 
day. 
(2) If such party fails without lawful excuse to appear in person on the day so appointed, the Court may 
pronounce judgment against him, or make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit. 
ORDER XI-DISCOVERY AND INSPECTION 
1. Discovery by interrogatories— In any suit the plaintiff or defendant by leave of the Court may deliver 
interrogatories in writing for the examination of the opposite parties or any one or more of such parties and 
such interrogatories when delivered shall have a note at the foot thereof stating which of such interrogatories 
each of such persons is required to answer: Provided that no party shall deliver more than one set of 
interrogatories to the same party without an order for that purpose : Provided also that interrogatories which 
do not relate to any matters in question in the suit shall be deemed irrelevant, notwithstanding that they might 
be admissible on the oral cross-examination of a witness. 
2. Particular interrogatories to be submitted— On an application for leave to deliver interrogatories, the 
particular interrogatories proposed to be delivered shall be submitted to the Court. In deciding upon such 
65

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
application, the Court shall take into account any offer, which may be made by the party sought to be 
interrogated to deliver particulars, or to make admissions, or to produce documents relating to the matters in 
question, or any of them, and leave shall be given as to such only of the interrogatories submitted as the 
Court shall consider necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs. 
3. Costs of interrogatories— In adjusting the costs of the suit inquiry shall at the instance of any party be 
made into the propriety of exhibiting such interrogatories, and if it is the opinion of the taxing officer or of the 
Court, either with or without an application for inquiry, that such interrogatories have been exhibited 
unreasonably, vexatiously, or at improper length, the cost occasioned by the said interrogatories and the 
answers thereto shall be paid in any event by the party in fault. 
4. Form of interrogatories. — Interrogatories shall be in Form No. 2 in Appendix C, with such variations as 
circumstances may require. 
5. Corporations— Where any party to a suit is a corporation or a body of persons, whether incorporated or 
not, empowered by law to sue or be sued, whether in its own name or in the name of any officer or other 
person, any opposite party may apply for an order allowing him to deliver interrogatories to any member or 
officer of such corporation or body, and an order may be made accordingly. 
6. Objections to interrogatories by answer— Any objection to answering any interrogatory on the ground that 
it is scandalous or irrelevant or not exhibited bona fide for the purpose of the suit, or that the matters inquired 
into are not sufficiently material at that stage, [167][or on the ground of privilege or any other ground], may be 
taken in the affidavit in answer. 
7. Setting aside and striking out interrogatories— Any interrogatories may be set aside on the ground that 
they have been exhibited unreasonably or vexatiously, or struck out on the ground that they are prolix, 
oppressive, unnecessary or scandalous; and any application for this purpose may be made within seven 
days after service of the interrogatories. 
8. Affidavit in answer, filing— Interrogatories shall be answered by affidavit to be filed within ten days or 
within such other time as the Court may allow. 
9. Form of affidavit in answer— An affidavit in answer to interrogatories shall be in Form No. 3 in Appendix 
C, with such variations as circumstances may require. 
10. No exception to be taken— No exceptions shall be taken to any affidavit in answer, but the sufficiency or 
otherwise of any such affidavit objected to as insufficient shall be determined by the Court. 
11. Order to answer or answer further— Where any person interrogated omits to answer, or answer 
insufficiently, the party interrogating may apply to the Court for an order requiring him to answer, or to 
answer further, as the case may be. And an order may be made requiring him to answer or answer further, 
either by affidavit or by viva voice examination, as the Court may direct. 
12. Application for discovery of documents— Any party may, without filing any affidavit, apply to the Court for 
an order directing any other party to any suit to make discovery on oath of the documents which are or have 
been in his possession or power, relating to any matter in question therein. On the hearing of such 
application the Court may either refuse or adjourn the same, if satisfied that such discovery is not necessary, 
or not necessary at that stage of the suit, or make such order, either generally or limited to certain classes of 
documents, as may, in its discretion be thought fit : 
Provided that discovery shall not be ordered when and so far as the Court shall be of opinion that it is not 
necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs. 
13. Affidavit of documents— The affidavit to be made by a party against whom such order as is mentioned in 
the last preceding rule has been made, shall specify which (if any) of the documents therein mentioned he 
objects to produce, and it shall be in Form No. 5 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may 
require. 
14. Production of documents— It shall be lawful for the Court, at any time during the pendency of any suit, to 
order the production by any party thereto, upon oath of such of the documents in his possession or power, 
relating to any matter in question in such suit, as the Court shall think right; and the Court may deal with such 
documents, when produced, in such manner as shall appear just. 
66

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15. Inspection of documents referred to in pleadings or affidavits— Every party to a suit shall be entitled at 
any time to give notice to any other party, in whose pleadings or affidavits reference is made to any 
document [168][or who has entered any document in any list annexed to his pleadings] or produce such 
document for the inspection of the party giving such notice, or of his pleader, and to permit him or them to 
take copies thereof; and any party not complying with such notice shall not afterwards be at liberty to put any 
such document in evidence on his behalf in such suit unless he shall satisfy the Court that such document 
relates only to his own title, he being a defendant to the suit, or that he had some other cause or excuse with 
the Court shall deem sufficient for not complying with such notice, in which case the Court may allow the 
same to be put in evidence on such terms as to costs an otherwise as the Court shall think fit. 
16. Notice to produce— Notice to any party to produce any documents referred to in his pleading or affidavits 
shall be in Form No. 7 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require. 
17. Time for inspection when notice given— The party to whom such notice is given shall, within ten days 
from the receipt of such notice, deliver to the party giving the same a notice stating a time within three days 
from the delivery thereof at which the documents, or such of them as he does not object to produce, may be 
inspected at the office of his pleader, or in the case of bankers books or other books of account or books in 
constant use for the purposes of any trade or business, at their usual place of custody, and stating which (if 
any) of the documents he objects to produce, and on what ground. Such notice shall be in Form No. 8 in 
Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require. 
18. Order for inspection— (1) Where the party served with notice under rule 15 omits to give such notice of a 
time for inspection or objects to give inspection, or offers inspection elsewhere than at the office of his 
pleader, the Court may, on the application of the party desiring it, make an order for inspection in such place 
and in such manner as it may think fit : 
Provided that the order shall not be made when and so far as the Court shall be of opinion that, it is not 
necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs. 
(2) Any application to inspect documents, except such as are referred to in the pleadings, particulars or 
affidavits of the party against whom the application is made or disclosed in his affidavit of documents, shall 
be founded upon an affidavit showing of what documents inspection is sought, that the party applying is 
entitled to inspect them, and that they are in the possession or power of the other party. The Court shall not 
make such order for inspection of such documents when and so far as the Court shall be of opinion that it is 
not necessary either for disposing fairly of the suit or for saving costs. 
19. Verified copies— (1) Where inspection of any business books is applied for, the Court may , if it thinks fit, 
instead of ordering inspection of the original books, order a copy of any entries therein to be furnished and 
verified by the affidavit of some person who has examined the copy with the original entries, and such 
affidavit shall state whether or not there are in the original book any and what erasures, interlineations or 
alterations : 
Provided that, notwithstanding that such copy has been supplied, the Court may order inspection of the book 
from which the copy was made. 
(2) Where on an application for an order for inspection privilege is claimed for any document, it shall be 
lawful for the Court to inspect the document for the purpose of deciding as to the validity of the claim of 
privilege [169][unless the document relates to matters of State.] 
(3) The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit at any time, and whether an affidavit of 
documents shall or shall not have already been ordered or made, make an order requiring any other party to 
state by affidavit whether anyone or more specific documents, to be specified in the application, is or are, or 
has or have at an time been, in his possession or power, and , if not then in his possession, when he parted 
with the same and what has become thereof. Such application shall be made on an affidavit stating that in 
the belief of the deponent the party against whom the application is made has, or has at some time and, in 
his possession or power the document or documents specified in the application, and that they relate to the 
matters in questions in the suit, or to some of them. 
20. Premature discovery— Where the party from whom discovery of any kind or inspection is sought objects 
to the same, or any part thereof, the Court may if satisfied that the right to the discovery or inspection sought 
depends on the determination of any issue or question in dispute in the suit, or that for any other reason it is 
desirable that any issue or question in dispute in the suit should be determined before deciding upon the 
67

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
right to the discovery or inspection, order that such issue or question be determined first, and reserve the 
question as to the discovery or inspection. 
21. Non-compliance with order for discovery— [170][(1)] Where any party fails to comply with any order to 
answer interrogatories, or for discovery or inspection of documents, he shall, if a plaintiff, be liable to have 
his suit dismissed for want of prosecution, and, if a defendant, to have his defence, if any struck out, and to 
be placed in the same position as if he had not defended, and the party interrogating or seeking discovery or 
inspection may apply to the Court for an order to that effect and [171][an order may be made on such 
application accordingly, after notice to the parties and after giving them a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard.] 
[172] [(2) Where an order is made under sub-rule (1) dismissing any suit, the plaintiff shall be precluded from 
bringing a fresh suit on the same cause of action.] 
22. Using answers to interrogatories at trial— Any party may, at the trial of a suit, use in evidence any one or 
more of the answers or any part of an answer of the opposite party to interrogatories without putting in the 
others or the whole of such answer : Provided always that in such case the Court may look at the whole of 
the answers, and if it shall be of opinion that any others of them are so connected with those put in that the 
last-mentioned answers ought not to be used without them, it may direct them to be put in. 
23. Order to apply to minors— This Order shall apply to minor plaintiffs and defendants, and to the next 
friends and guardians for the suit of the persons under disability. 
ORDER XII-ADMISSION 
1. Notice of admission of case— Any party to a suit may give notice, by his pleading, or otherwise in writing, 
that he admits the truth of the whole or any part of the case of any other party. 
2. Notice to admit documents— Either party may call upon the other party [173][to admit, within fifteen days 
from the date of service of the notice any document,] saving all just exceptions; and in case of refusal or 
neglect to admit, after such notice, the costs of proving any such document shall be paid by the party so 
neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the suit may be, unless the Court otherwise directs; and no 
costs of proving any document shall be allowed unless such notice is given, except where the omission to 
give the notice is, in the opinion of the Court, a saving of expense. 
[174][2A. Document to be deemed to be admitted if not divided after service of notice to admit documents— 
(1) Every document which a party is called upon to admit, if not denied specifically or by necessary 
implication, or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of that party or in his reply to the notice to admit 
documents, shall be deemed to be admitted except as against a person under a disability : 
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion and for reasons to be recorded, require any document so 
admitted to be proved otherwise than by such admission. 
(2) Where a party unreasonably neglects or refuses to admit a document after the service on him of the 
notice to admit documents, the Court may direct him to pay costs to the other party by way of compensation.] 
3. Form of notice— A notice to admit documents shall be in Form No. 9 in Appendix C, with such variations 
as circumstances may require. 
3A. Power of Court to record admission— Notwithstanding that no notice to admit documents has been given 
under rule 2, the Court, may at any stage of the proceeding before it, of its own motion, call upon any party to 
admit any document and shall in such a case, record whether the party admits or refuses or neglects to 
admit such document. 
4. Notice to admit acts— Any party, may, by notice in writing, at any time not later than nine days before the 
day fixed for the hearing, call on any other party to admit, for the purposes of the suit only, any specific fact 
or facts, mentioned in such notice. And in case of refusal or neglect to admit the same within six days after 
service of such notice, or within such further time as may be allowed by the Court, the costs of proving such 
fact or facts shall be paid by the party so neglecting or refusing, whatever the result of the suit may be, 
unless the Court otherwise directs: 
Provided that any admission made in pursuance of such notice is to be deemed to be made only for the 
purposes of the particular suit, and not as an admission to be used against the party on any other occasion 
or in favour of any person other than the party giving the notice: 
68

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided also that the Court may at any time allow any party to amend or withdraw any admission so made 
on such terms as may be just. 
5. Form of admissions— A notice to admit facts shall be in Form No. 10 in Appendix C, and admissions of 
facts shall be in Form No. 11 in Appendix C, with such variations as circumstances may require. 
[175][6. Judgment on admissions— (1) Where admissions of fact have been made either in the pleading or 
otherwise, whether orally or in writing, the Court may at any stage of the suit, either on the application of any 
party or of its own motion and without waiting for the determination of any other question between the 
parties, make such order or give such judgment as it may think fit, having regard to such admissions. 
(2) Whenever a judgment is pronounced under sub-rule (1) a decree shall be drawn upon in accordance with 
the judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.] 
7. Affidavit of signature— An affidavit of the pleader or his clerk, of the due signature of any admissions 
made in pursuance of any notice to admit documents or facts, shall be sufficient evidence of such 
admissions, if evidence thereof is required. 
8. Notice to produce documents— Notice to produce documents shall be in Form No. 12 in Appendix C, with 
such variations as circumstances may require. An affidavit of the pleader, or his clerk, of the service of any 
notice to produce, and of the time when it was served, with a copy of the notice to produce, shall in all cases 
be sufficient evidence of the service of the notice, and of the time it was served. 
9. Costs— If a notice to admit or produce specifies documents which are not necessary, the costs 
occasioned thereby, shall be borne by the party giving such notice. 
ORDER XIII-PRODUCTION, IMPOUNDING AND RETURN OF DOCUMENTS 
1. Documentary evidence to be produced [176][at or before the settlement of issues]— (1) The parties or 
their pleaders shall produce, [177][at or before the settlement of issues], all the documentary evidence of 
every description in their possession or power, on which they intend to rely, and which has not already been 
filed in Court, and all documents which the Court has ordered to be produced. 
(2) The Court shall receive the documents so produced : Provided that they are accompanied by an accurate 
list thereof prepared in such form as the High Court directs. 
2. Effect of non-production of documents— [178][(1)] No documentary evidence in the possession or power 
of any party which should have been, but has not been produced in accordance with the requirements of rule 
1 shall be received at any subsequent stage of the proceedings unless good cause is shown to the 
satisfaction of the Court for the non-production thereof; and the Court receiving any such evidence shall 
record the reasons for so doing. 
[179] [(2)] Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall apply to documents, — 
(a) produced for the cross-examination of the witness of the other party, or 
(b) handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.] 
3. Rejection of irrelevant or inadmissible documents— The Court may at any stage of the suit reject any 
document which it considers irrelevant or otherwise inadmissible, recording the grounds of such rejection. 
4. Endorsements on documents admitted in evidence— (1) Subject to the provisions of the next following 
sub- rule, there shall be endorsed on every document which as been admitted in evidence in the suit the 
following particulars, namely :— 
(a) the number and title of the suit, 
(b) the name of the person producing the document, 
(c) the date on which it was produced, and 
(d) a statement of its having been so admitted, 
and the endorsement shall be signed or initialled by the Judge. 
69

 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(2) Where a document so admitted is an entry in a book, account or record, and a copy thereof has been 
substituted for the original under the next following rule, the particulars aforesaid shall be endorsed on the 
copy and the endorsement thereon shall be signed or initialled by the Judge. 
5. Endorsements on copies of admitted entries in books, accounts and records— (1) Save in so far as is 
otherwise provided by the Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 ( 18 of 1891) where a document admitted in 
evidence in the suit is an entry in a letter-book or a shop-book or a or other account in current use, the party 
on whose behalf the book or account is produced may furnish a copy of the entry. 
(2) Where such a document is an entry in a public record produced from a public office or by a public officer, 
or an entry in a book or account belonging to a person other than a party on whose behalf the book or 
account is produced, the Court may require a copy of the entry to be furnished— 
(a) where the record, book or account is produced on behalf of a party, then by that party, or 
(b) where the record, book or account is produced in obedience to an order of the Court acting of its own 
motion, then by either or any party. 
(3) Where a copy of an entry is furnished under the foregoing provisions of this rule, the Court shall, after 
accusing the copy to be examined, compared and certified in manner mentioned in rule 17 of Order VII, mark 
the entry and cause the book, account or record in which it occurs to be returned to the person producing it. 
6. Endorsements on documents rejected as inadmissible in evidence— Where a document relied on as 
evidence by either party is considered by the Court to be inadmissible in evidence, there shall be endorsed 
thereon the particulars mentioned in clauses (a), (b), and (c) of rule 4, sub-rule (1), together with a statement 
of its having been rejected, and the endorsement shall be signed or initialled by the Judge. 
7. recording of admitted and return or rejected documents— (1) Every document which has been admitted in 
evidence or a copy thereof where a copy has been substituted for the original under rule 5, shall form part of 
the record of the suit. 
(2) Documents not admitted in evidence shall not form part of the record and shall be returned to the persons 
respectively producing them. 
8. Court may order any document to be impounded— Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 5 or rule 7 
of this Order or in rule 17 of Order VII, the Court may, if it sees sufficient cause, direct any document or book 
produced before it in any suit to be impounded and kept in the custody of an officer of the Court, for such 
period and subject to such conditions as the Court think fit. 
9. Return of admitted documents— (1) Any person, whether a party to the suit or not, desirous of receiving 
back any document produced by him in the suit and placed on the record shall, unless the document is 
impounded under rule 8, be entitled to receive back the same,— 
(a) where the suit is one in which an appeal is not allowed, when the suit has been disposed of, and 
(b) where the suit is one in which an appeal is allowed, when the Court is satisfied that the time for preferring 
an appeal has elapsed and that no appeal has been preferred or, if an appeal has been preferred, when the 
appeal has been disposed of : 
[180] [Provided that a document may be returned at any time earlier than that prescribed by this rule if the 
person applying therefor— 
(a) delivers to the proper officer for being substituted for the original,— 
(i) in the case of a party to the suit, a certified copy, and 
(ii) in the case of any other person, an ordinary copy which has been examined, compared and certified in 
the manner mentioned in sub-rule (2) of rule 17 of Order VII, and 
(b) undertakes to produce the original, if required to do so :] 
Provided also, that no document shall be returned with, by force of the decree, has become wholly void or 
useless. 
(2) On the return of a document admitted in evidence, a receipt shall be given by the person receiving it. 
70

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. Court may send for papers from its own records or from other Courts— (1) The Court may of its own 
motion, and may in its discretion upon the application of any of the parties to a suit, send for, either from its 
own records or from any other suit or proceedings, and inspect the same. 
(2) Every application made under this rule (unless the Court otherwise directs) be supported by an affidavit 
showing how the record is material to the suit in which the application is made, and that the applicant cannot 
without unreasonable delay or expense obtain a duly authenticated copy of the record or of such portion 
thereof as the applicant requires, or that the production of the original is necessary for the purposes of 
justice. 
(3) Nothing contained in this rule shall be deemed to enable the Court to use in evidence any document 
which under the law of evidence would be inadmissible in the suit. 
11. Provisions as to documents applied to material objects— The provisions therein contained as to 
documents shall, so far as may be, apply to all other material objects producible as evidence. 
ORDER XIV-SETTLEMENT OF ISSUES AND DETERMINATION OF SUIT ON ISSUES OF LAW OR ON 
ISSUES AGREED UPON 
1. Framing of issues— (1) Issues arise when a material proposition of fact or law is affirmed by the one party 
and denied by the other. 
(2) Material propositions are those propositions of law or fact which a plaintiff must allege in order to show a 
right to sue or a defendant must allege in order to constitute his defence. 
(3) Each material proposition affirmed by one party denied by the other shall form the subject of distinct 
issue. 
(4) Issues are of two kinds : 
(a) issues of fact, 
(b) issues of law. 
(5) At the first hearing of the suit the Court shall, after reading the plaint and the written statements, if any, 
and [181][after examination under rule 2 of Order X and after hearing the parties or their pleaders], ascertain 
upon what material propositions of fact or of law the parties are at variance, and shall thereupon proceed to 
frame and record the issues on which the right decision of the case appears to depend. 
(6) Nothing in this rule requires the Court to frame and record issues where the defendant at the first hearing 
of the suit makes no defence. 
[182][2. Court to pronounce judgment on all issues— (1) Notwithstanding that a case may be disposed of on 
preliminary issue, the Court shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), pronounce judgment on all issues. 
(2) Where issues both of law and of fact arise in the same suit, and the Court is of opinion that the case or 
any part thereof may be disposed of on an issue of law only, it may try that issue first if that issue relates to— 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Court, or 
(b) a bar to the suit created by any law for the time being inforce. 
and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit, postpone the settlement of the other issues until after that issue has 
been determined, and may deal with the suit in accordance with the decision on that issue.] 
3. Materials from which issues may be framed— The Court may frame the issues from all or any of the 
following materials :— 
(a) allegations made on oath by the parties, or by any persons present on their behalf, or made by the 
pleaders of such parties; 
(b) allegations made in the pleadings or in answers to interrogatories delivered in the suit; 
(c) the contents of documents by either party. 
4. Court may examine witnesses or documents before framing issues— Where the Court is of opinion that 
the issues cannot be correctly framed without the examination of some person not before the Court or 
71

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
without the inspection of some document not produced in the suit, it may adjourn the framing of the issues to 
a future day, and may (subject to any law for the time being in force) compel the attendance of any person or 
the production of any document by the person in whose possession or power it is by summons or other 
process. 
5. Power to amend and strike out, issues— (1) The Court may at any time before passing a decree amend 
the issues or frame additional issues on such terms as it thinks fit, and all such amendments or additional 
issues as may be necessary for determining the matters in controversy between the parties shall be so made 
or framed. 
(2) The Court may also, at any time before passing a decree, strike out any issues that appear to it to be 
wrongly framed or introduced. 
6. Questions of fact or law may by agreement be stated in form of issues— Where the parties to a suit are 
agreed as to the question of fact or of law to be decided between them, they may state the same in the form 
of an issue, and enter into an agreement in writing that upon the finding of the Court in the affirmative or the 
negative of such issue,— 
(a) a sum of money specified in the agreement or to be ascertained by the Court, or in such manner as the 
Court may direct, shall be paid by one of the parties to the other of them, or that one of them be declared 
entitled to some right or subject some liability specified in the agreement; 
(b) some property specified in the agreement and in dispute in the suit shall be delivered by one of the 
parties to the other of them, or as that other may direct; or 
(c) one or more of the parties shall do or abstain from doing some particular act specified in the agreement 
and relating to the matter in dispute. 
7. Court, if satisfied that agreement was executed in good faith, may pronounce judgment— Where the Court 
is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it deems proper,— 
(a) that the agreement was duly executed by the parties; 
(b) that they have a substantial interest in the decision of such question as aforesaid, and 
(c) that the same is fit to be tried and decided, 
it shall proceed to record and try the issue and state its finding or decision thereon in the same manner as if 
the issue had been framed by the Court. 
and shall, upon the finding or decision on such issue, pronounce judgment according to the terms of the 
agreement, and, upon the judgment so pronounced a decree shall follow 
ORDER XV-DISPOSAL OF THE SUIT AT THE FIRST HEARING 
1. Parties not at issue— Where at the first hearing of a suit it appears that the parties are not at issue on any 
question of law or of fact, the Court may at once pronounce judgment. 
2. One of several defendants not at issue— [183][(1)] Where there are more defendants than one, and any 
one of the defendants is not at issue with the plaintiff on any question of law or of fact, the Court may at once 
pronounce judgment for or against such defendant and the suit shall proceed only against the other 
defendants. 
[184] [(2) Wherever a judgment is pronounced under this rule, a decree shall be drawn up in accordance with 
such judgment and the decree shall bear the date on which the judgment was pronounced.] 
3. Parties at issue— (1) Where the parties are at issue on some question of law or of fact, and issues have 
been frame by the Court as herein before provided, if the Court is satisfied that no further argument or 
evidence than the parties can at once adduce is required upon such of the issues as may be sufficient for the 
decision of the suit, and that no injustice will result from proceeding with the suit forthwith, the Court may 
proceed to determine such issues, and , if the finding thereon is sufficient for the decision, may pronounce 
judgment accordingly, whether the summons has been issued for the settlement of issues only or for the final 
disposal of the suit : 
72

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Provided that, where the summons has been issued for the settlement of issues only, the parties or their 
pleaders are present and none of them objects. 
(2) Where the finding is not sufficient for the decision, the Court shall postpone the further hearing of the suit, 
and shall fix a day for the production of such further evidence, or for such further argument as the case 
requires. 
4. Failure to produce evidence— Where the summons has been issued for the final disposal of the suit and 
either party fails without sufficient cause to produce the evidence on which he relies, the Court may at once 
pronounce judgment, or any, if it thinks fit, after framing and recording issues, adjourn the suit for production 
of such evidence as may be necessary for its decision upon such issues. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh.— In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh add the following rule 5 after rule 4. 
"5. Striking off defence for failure to deposit admitted rent, etc.— (1) In any suit by a lessor for the eviction of 
a lessee after the determination of his lease and for the recovery from him of rent or compensation for use 
and occupation, the defendant shall, at or before the first hearing of the suit, deposit the entire amount 
admitted by him to be due together with interest thereon at the rate of nine per cent. per annum and whether 
or not he admits any amount to be due, he shall throughout the continuation of the suit regularly deposit the 
monthly amount due within a week from the date of its accrual, and in the event of any default in making the 
deposit of the entire amount admitted by him to be due or the monthly amount due as aforesaid, the Court 
may, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), strike off his defence. 
Explanation 1.— The expression "first hearing" means the date for filing written statement for hearing 
mentioned in the summons or where more than one of such dates are mentioned, the last of the dates 
mentioned. 
Explanation 2.— The expression "entire amount admitted 
by him to be due" means the entire gross amount, whether as rent or compensation for use and occupation, 
calculated at the admitted rate of rent for the admitted period of arrears after making no other deduction 
except the taxes, if any, paid to a local authority in respect of the building on lessor's account and the 
amount, if any, paid to the lessor acknowledged by the lessor in writing signed by him and the amount, if any, 
deposited in any Court under section 30 of the U.P. Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and 
Eviction) Act, 1972. 
Explanation 3.— (1) The expression "monthly amount due" means the amount due every month, whether as 
rent or compensation for use and occupation at the admitted rate of rent, after making no other deduction 
except the taxes, if any, paid to a local authority, in respect of the building on lessor's account. 
(2) Before making an order for striking off defence, the Court may consider any representation made by the 
defendant in that behalf provided such representation is made within 10 days of the first hearing or, of the 
expiry of the week referred to in sub-section (1), as the case may be. 
(3) The amount deposited under this rule may at any time be withdrawn by the plaintiff. 
Provided that such withdrawal shall not have the effect of prejudicing any claim by the plaintiff disputing the 
correctness of the amount deposited: 
Provided further that if the amount deposited includes any sums claimed by the depositor to be deductible on 
any account, the Court may require the plaintiff to furnish the security for such sum before he is allowed to 
withdraw the same." 
[U.P. Act (57 of 1976) amended vide U.P. Govt. Gazzette dated 3.10.1981]. 
ORDER XVI-SUMMONING AND ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES 
[185][1. List of witnesses and summons to witnesses— (1) On or before such date as the Court may appoint, 
and not later than fifteen days after the date on which the issues are settled, the parties shall present in 
Court a list of witnesses whom they propose to call either to give evidence or to produce documents and 
obtain summonses to such person for their attendance in Court. 
73

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) A party desirous of obtaining any summons for the attendance of any person shall file in Court an 
application stating therein the purpose for which the witness is proposed to be summoned. 
(3) The Court may, for reasons to be recorded, permit a party to call, whether by summoning through Court 
or otherwise, any witness, other than those whose names appear in the list referred to in sub-rule (1), if such 
part shows sufficient cause for the omission to mention the name of such witness in the said list. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), summonses referred to in this rule may be obtained by the 
parties on an application to the Court or to such officer as may be appointed by the Court in this behalf.] 
[186][1A. Production of witnesses without summons— A subject to the provisions of sub-rule (3) of rule 1, 
and party to the suit may, without applying for summons under rule 1, bring any witness to give evidence or 
to produce documents.] 
2. Expenses of witnesses to be paid into Court on applying for summons— (1) The party applying for a 
summons shall, before the summons is granted and within a period to be fixed, pay into Court such a sum of 
money as appears to the Court to be sufficient to defray the travelling and other expenses of the person 
summoned in passing to and from the Court in which he is required to attend, and for one day's attendance. 
(2) Experts—In determining the amount payable under this rule, the Court may, in the case of any person 
summoned to give evidence as an expert, allow reasonable remuneration for the time occupied both in giving 
evidence and in performing any work of an expert character necessary for the case. 
(3) Scale of expenses—Where the Court is subordinate to High Court, regard shall be had, in fixing the scale 
of such expenses to a any rules made in that behalf. 
[187] [(4)] Expenses to be directly paid to witnesses—Where the summons is served directly by the party on 
a witness, the expenses referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be paid to the witness by the party or his agent.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh.— In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh:— 
(i) In rule 2, sub-rule (1), insert, at the end, the following proviso, 
"Provided, where Government is the party applying for a summons to a Government servant, it shall not be 
necessary for it to make any such payment into Court." 
(ii) After sub-rule (4) insert the following, namely:— 
"(4-A) Allowances, etc., of Government servant witnesses to be taxed as costs.— Any travelling and daily 
allowances and the salary, payable to a Government servant who attends the Court to give evidence or to 
produce a document shall, on the amount being certified by such witness, be taxable as costs. 
Explanation 1.— The travelling and daily allowances shall be in accordance with the rules governing such 
allowances, applicable to the Government servant in question. 
Explanation 2— The daily allowance and salary of the Government servant shall be proportionate to the 
number of days of his attendance required by the Court." 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976]. 
3. Tender of expenses to witness— The sum so paid into Court shall be tendered to the person summoned, 
at the time of serving the summons, if it can be served personally. 
4. Procedure where insufficient sum paid in— (1) Where it appears to the Court or to such officer as it 
appoints in this behalf that the sum paid into Court is not sufficient to cover such expenses or reasonable 
remuneration, the Court may direct such further sum to be paid to the person summoned as appears to be 
necessary on that account, and, in case of default in payment, may order such sum to be levied by 
attachment and sale of the movable property of the party obtaining the summons; or the Court may 
discharge the person summoned without requiring him to give evidence; or may both order such levy and 
discharge such person as aforesaid. 
74

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(2) Expenses of witnesses detained more than one day—Where it is necessary to detain the person 
summoned for a longer period than one day, the Court may, from time to time, order the party at whose 
instance he was summoned to pay into Court such sum as is sufficient to defray the expenses of his 
detention for such further period, and, in default of such deposit being made, may order such sum to be 
levied by attachment and sale of the movable property of such party; or the Court may discharge the person 
summoned without requiring him to give evidence, or may other order such levy and discharge such person 
as aforesaid. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh.— In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh, in Order XVI, rule 4, add the following 
proviso:— 
"Provided that nothing in this rule shall apply to a case where the witness is a Government servant 
summoned at the instance of Government as a party. 
[U.P. Act., 57 of 1976]. 
5. Time, place and purpose of attendance to be specified in summons— Every summons for the attendance 
of a person to give evidence or to produce a document shall specify the time and place at which he is 
required to attend, and also whether his attendance is required for the purpose of giving evidence or to 
produce a document, or for both purposes; and any particular document, which the person summoned is 
called on to produce, shall be described in the summons with reasonable accuracy. 
6. Summons to produce document— Any person may be summoned to produce a document, without being 
summoned to give evidence, and any person summoned merely to produce a document shall be deemed to 
have complied with the summons if he causes such document to be produced instead of attending 
personally to produce the same. 
7. Power to require persons present in Court to give evidence or produce document— Any person present in 
Court may be required by the Court to give evidence or to produce any document then and there in his 
possession or power. 
[188][7A. Summons given to party for service— (1) The Court may, on the application of any party for the 
issue of a summons for the attendance of any person, permit such party to effect service of such summons 
on such person and shall, in such a case, deliver the summons to such party for service. 
(2) The service of such summons shall be effected by or on behalf of such party by delivering or tendering to 
the witness personally a copy thereof signed by the Judge or such officer of the Court as he may appoint in 
this behalf and sealed with the seal of the Court. 
(3) The provisions of rules 16 and 18 of Order V shall apply to a summons personally served under this rule 
as if the person effecting service were a serving officer. 
(4) If such summons, when tendered, is refused or if the person served refuses to sign and 
acknowledgement of service or for any reason such summons cannot be served personally, the Court shall, 
on the application of the party, re-issue such summons to be served by the Court in the same manner as a 
summons to a defendant. 
(5) Where a summons is served by a party under this rule, the party shall not be required to pay the fees 
otherwise chargeable for the service of summons.] 
8. Summons how served— Every summons [189][under this Order, not being a summons delivered to a 
party for service under rule 7A,] shall be served as nearly as may be in the same manner as a summons to a 
defendant and the rules in Order V as to proof of service shall apply in the case of all summonses served 
under this rule. 
9. Time for serving summons— Service shall in all cases be made a sufficient time before the time specified 
in the summons for the attendance of the person summoned, to allow him a reasonable time for preparation 
and for travelling to the place at which his attendance is required. 
75

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
10. Procedure whose witness fails to comply with summons— [190][(1) Where a person to whom a 
summons has been issued either to attend to give evidence or to produce a document, fails to attend or to 
produce the document in compliance with such summons, the Court— 
(a) shall, if the certificate of the serving officer has not been verified by affidavit, or if service of the summons 
has been effected by a party or his agent, or 
(b) may, if the certificate of the serving officer has been so verified. 
examine on oath the serving officer or the party or his agent, as the case may be, who has effected service, 
or cause him to be so examined by any Court, touching the service or non-service of the summons.] 
(2) Where the Court sees reason to believe that such evidence or production is material, and that such 
person has, without lawful excuse, failed to attend or to produce the document in compliance with such 
summons or has intentionally avoided service, it may issue a proclamation requiring him to attend to give 
evidence or to produce the document at a time and place to be named therein; and a copy of such 
proclamation shall be affixed on the outer door or other conspicuous part of the house in which he ordinarily 
resides. 
(3) In view of or at the time of issuing such proclamation, or at any time afterwards, the Court may, in its 
discretion, issue a warrant, either with or without bail, for the arrest of such person, and may make an order 
for the attachment of his property to such amount as it thinks fit, not exceeding the amount of the costs of 
attachment and of any fine which may be imposed under rule 12 : 
Provided that no Court of Small Causes shall make an order for the attachment of immovable property. 
11. If witness appears attachment may be withdrawn— Where at any time after the attachment of his 
property, such person appears and satisfies the Court— 
(a) that he did not, without lawful excuse, fail to comply with the summons or intentionally avoid service, and 
(b) where he has failed to attend at the time and place named in a proclamation issued under the last 
proceeding rule, that he had no notice of such proclamation in time to attend. 
the Court shall direct that the property be released from attachment, and shall make such order as to the 
costs of the attachment as it thinks fit. 
12. Procedure if witness fails to appear— [191][(1)] The Court may, where such person does not appear, or 
appears but fails so to satisfy the Court, impose upon him such fine not exceeding five hundred rupees as it 
thinks fit, having regard to his condition in life and all the circumstances of the case, and may order his 
property, or any part thereof, to the attached and sold or, if already attached under rule 10, to be sold for the 
purpose of satisfying all costs to such attachment, together with the amount of the said fine, if any: 
Provided that, if the person whose attendance is required pays into Court the Costs and fine aforesaid, the 
Court shall order the property to be released from attachment. 
[192] [(2) Notwithstanding that the Court has not issued a proclamation under sub-rule (2) of rule 10, nor 
issued a warrant nor ordered attachment under sub-rule (3) of that rule, the Court may impose fine under 
sub- rule (1) of this rule after giving notice to such person to show cause why the fine should not be 
imposed.] 
13. Mode of attachment.—The provisions with regard to the attachment and sale of property in the execution 
of a decree shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply to any attachment and sale under this 
Order as if the person whose property is so attached were a judgment-debtor. 
14. Court may of its own accord summon as witnesses strangers to suit.— Subject to the provisions of this 
Code as to attendance and appearance and to any law for the time being in force, where the Court at any 
time thinks it necessary [193][to examine any person, including a party to the suit] and not called as witness 
by a party to the suit, the Court may, of its own motion, cause such person to be summoned as a witness to 
give evidence, or to produce any document in his possession on a day to be appointed, and may examine 
him as a witness or require him to produce such document. 
15. Duty of persons summoned give evidence or produce document— Subject as last aforesaid, whoever is 
summoned to appear and give evidence in a suit shall attend at the time an place named in the summons for 
76

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
that purpose, and whoever is summoned to produce a document shall either attend to produce it, or cause it 
to be produced, at such time and place. 
16. When they may depart— (1) A person so summoned and attending shall, unless the Court otherwise 
directs, attend at each hearing until the suit has been disposed of. 
(2) On the application of either party and the payment through the Court of all necessary expenses (if any), 
the Court may require any person so summoned and attending to furnish security to attend at the next or any 
other hearing or until the suit is disposed of and, in default of his furnishing such security, may order him to 
be detained in the civil prison. 
17. Application of rules 10 to 13— The provisions of rules 10 to 13 shall, so far as they are applicable, be 
deemed to apply to any person who having attended in compliance with a summons departs, without lawful 
excuse, in contravention of rule 16. 
18. Procedure where witness apprehended cannot give evidence or produce document— Where any person 
arrested under a warrant is brought before the Court in custody and cannot, owing to the absence of the 
parties or any of them , give the evidence or produce the document which he has been summoned to give or 
produce, the Court may require him to give reasonable bail or other security for his appearance at such time 
and place as it thinks fit, on such bail or security being given, may release him, and, in default of his giving 
such bail or security, any order him to be detained in the civil prison. 
19. No witness to be ordered to attend in person unless resident within certain limits— No one shall be 
ordered to attend in person to give evidence unless he resides— 
(a) within the local limits of the Court's ordinary original jurisdiction, or 
(b) without such limits but at a place less than [194][one hundred] or (where there is railway or steamer 
communication or other established public conveyance for five-sixths of the distance between the place 
where he resides and the place were the Court is situate) less than [195][five hundred kilometers] distance 
from the Court-house : 
[196] [Provided that where transport by air is available between the two places mentioned in this rule and the 
witness is paid the fare by air, he may be ordered to attend in person.] 
20. Consequence of refusal of party to give evidence when called on by Court— Where any party to a suit 
present in Court refuses, without lawful excuse, when required by the Court, to give evidence or to produce 
any document then and there in his possession or power, the Court may pronounce judgment against him or 
make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit. 
21. Rules as to witnesses to apply to parties summoned— Where any party to a suit is required to give 
evidence or to produce a document, the provisions as to witnesses shall apply to him so for as they are 
applicable. 
[197][ORDER XVIA-ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS 
1. Definitions— In this Order,— 
(a) "detained" includes detained under any law providing for preventive detention; 
(b) "prison" includes— 
(i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general or special order, to be a 
subsidiary jail; and 
(ii) any reformatory, borstal institution or other institution of a like nature. 
2. Power to require attendance of prisoners to give evidence— Where it appears to a Court that the evidence 
of a person confined or detained in a prison within the State is material in a suit, the Court may make an 
order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce that person before the Court to give evidence : 
Provided that, if the distance from the prison to the Court-house is more than twenty-five kilometres, no such 
order shall be made unless the Court is satisfied that the examination of such person on commission will not 
be adequate. 
77

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Expenses to be paid into Court— (1) Before making any order under rule 2, the Court shall require the 
party at whose instance or for whose benefit the order is to be issued, to pay into Court such sum of money 
as appears to the Court to be sufficient to defray the expenses of the execution of the order, including the 
traveling and other expenses of the escort provided for the witness. 
(2) Where the Court is subordinate to a High Court, regard shall be had, in fixing the scale of such expenses, 
to any rule made by the High Court in that behalf. 
4. Power of State Government to exclude certain persons from the operation of rule 2— (1) The State 
Government may, at any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub-rule (2) by general or special 
order, direct that nay person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in which he or they 
may be confined or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains in force, no order made under 
rule 2, whether before or after the date of the order made by the State Government, shall have effect in 
respect of such person or class of persons. 
(2) Before making an order under sub-rule (1), the State Government shall have regard to the following 
matters, namely :— 
(a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds on which, the person or class of persons have been 
ordered to be confined or detained in prison; 
(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of persons is allowed to be removed 
from the prison; and 
(c) the public interest, generally. 
5. Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order in certain cases— Where the person in 
respect of whom an order is made under rule 2 — 
(a) is certified by the medical officer attached to the prison as unfit to be removed from the prison by reason 
of sickness or infirmity; or 
(b) is under committal for trial or under remand pending trial or pending a preliminary investigation; or 
(c) is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the time required for comply with the 
order and for taking him back to the prison in which he is confined or detained ; or 
(d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government under rule 4 applies,the officer in charge of 
the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court's order and shall send to the Court a statement of reason 
for so abstaining. 
6. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody—In any other case, the officer in charge of the prison shall, 
upon delivery of the Court's order, cause the person named therein to be taken to the Court so as to be 
present at the time mentioned in such order, and shall cause him to be kept in custody in or near the Court 
until he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to be taken back to the prison in which he is 
confined or detained. 
7. Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison—(1) Where it appears to the Court that 
the evidence of a person confined or detained in a pison, whether within the State or elsewhere in India, is 
material in a suit but the attendance of such person cannot be secured under the preceding provisions of this 
order, the Court may issue a commission for the examination of that person in the prison in which he is 
confined or detained. 
(2) The provisions of Order XXVI shall, so far may be, apply in relation to the examination on commission of 
such person in prison as they apply in relation to the examination on commission of any other person.] 
ORDER XVII-ADJOURNMENTS 
1. Court may grant time and adjourn hearing—(1) The Court may, if sufficient cause is shown, at any stage 
of the suit grant time to the parties or to any of them, and may from time to time adjourn the hearing of the 
suit. 
(2) Costs of adjournment—In every such case the Court shall fix a day for the further hearing of the suit and 
may make such order, as it thinks fit with respect to the costs occasioned by the adjournment: 
78

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[198][Provided that,— 
(a) When the hearing of the suit has commenced, it shall be continued from day-to-day until all the witnesses 
in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds that, for the exceptional reasons to be recorded 
by it, the adjournment of the hearing beyond the following day is necessary. 
(b) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the circumstances are beyond 
the control of that party. 
(c) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not be a ground for adjournment. 
(d) where the illness of a pleader or his inability to conduct the case for any reason, other than his being 
engaged in another Court, is put forward as a ground for adjournment, the Court shall not grant the 
adjournment unless it is satisfied that the party applying for adjournment could not have engaged another 
pleader in time. 
(e) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not present or the party or his pleader, 
though present in Court, is not ready to examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if it thinks fit, 
record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the examination-in­
chief or cross-examination of the witness, as the case may be, by the party or his pleader not present or not 
ready as aforesaid.] 
2 . Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed,— Where, on any day to which the hearing of the suit is 
adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to appear, the Court may proceed to dispose of the suit in one of 
the modes directed in that behalf by Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit. 
[199] [Explanation.—Where the evidence or a substantial portion of the evidence of any party has already 
been recorded and such party fails to appear on any day to which the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the 
Court may, in its discretion, proceed with the case as if such party were present.] 
3 . Court may proceed notwithstanding either party fails to produce evidence, etc.— Where any party to a 
suit to whom time has been granted fails to produce his evidence, or to cause the attendance of his 
witnesses, or to perform any other act necessary to the further progress of the suit, for which time has been 
allowed, [200][the Court may, notwithstanding such default,— 
(a) if the parties are present, proceed to decide the suit forthwith, or 
(b) if the parties are, or any of them is, absent, proceed under rule 2]. 
ORDER XVIII- HEARING OF THE SUIT AND EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES 
1 . Right to begin— The plaintiff has the right to begin unless the defendant admits the facts alleged by the 
plaintiff and contends that either in point of law or on some additional facts alleged by the defendant the 
plaintiff is not entitled to any part of the relief which he seeks, in which case the defendant has the right to 
begin. 
2 . Statement and production of evidence— (1) On the day fixed for the hearing of the suit or on any other 
day to which the hearing is adjourned, the party having the right to begin shall state his case and produce his 
evidence in support of the issues which he is bound to prove. 
(2) The other party shall then state his case and produce his evidence (if any) and may then address the 
Court generally on the whole case. 
(3) The party beginning may then reply generally on the whole case. 
[201] [(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule, the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, direct or 
permit any party to examine any witness at any stage.] 
3 . Evidence where several issues— Where there are several issues, the burden of proving some of which 
lies on the party, the party beginning may, at his option, either produce his evidence on those issues or 
reserve it by way of answer to the evidence produced by the other party; and, in the latter case, the party 
beginning may produce evidence on those issues after the other party has produced all his evidence, and 
the other party may then reply specially on the evidence so produced by the party beginning; but the party 
beginning will then be entitled to reply generally on the whole case. 
79

 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
[202][3A . Party to appear before other witnesses— Where a party himself wishes to appear as a witness, he 
shall so appear before any other witness on his behalf has been examined, unless the Court, for reasons to 
be recorded permits him to appear as his own witness at a later stage.] 
4 . Witnesses to be examined in open Court— The evidence of the witnesses in attendance shall be taken 
orally in open Court in the presence and under the personal direction and superintendence of the judge. 
[203][[204]5 . How evidence shall be taken in appealable cases —In cases in which an appeal is allowed, the 
evidence of each witness shall be,— 
(a) taken down in the language of the Court,— 
(i) in writing by, or in the presence and under the personal direction and superintendence of, the Judge, or 
(ii) from the dictation of the Judge directly on a typewriter, or 
(b) if the Judge, for reasons to be recorded, so directs, recorded mechanically in the language of the Court in 
the presence of the Judge.] 
[205]6 . When deposition to be interpreted— Where the evidence is taken down in language different from 
that in which it is given, and the witness does not understand the language in which it is taken down, the 
evidence as taken down in writing shall be interpreted to him in the language in which it is given. 
[206]7 . Evidence under Section 138.— Evidence taken down under section 138 shall be in the form 
prescribed by rule 5 and shall be read over and signed and, as occasion may require, interpreted and 
corrected as if it were evidence taken down under that rule. 
[207]8 . Memorandum when evidence not taken down by Judge— Where the evidence is not taken down in 
writing by the Judge, [208][or from his dictation in the open Court, or recorded mechanically in his presence,] 
he shall be bound, as the examination of each witness proceeds, to make a memorandum of the substance 
of what each witness deposes, and such memorandum shall be written and signed by the Judge and shall 
form part of the record. 
[209][[210]9 . When evidence may be taken in English— (1) Where English is not the language of the Court, 
but all the parties to the suit who appear in person, and the pleaders of such of the parties as appear by 
pleaders, do not object to having such evidence as is given in English, being taken down in English, the 
Judge may so take it down or cause it to be taken down. 
(2) Where evidence is not given in English but all the parties who appear in person, and the pleaders of such 
of the parties as appear by pleaders, do not object to having such evidence being taken down in English, the 
Judge may take down, or cause to be taken down, such evidence in English.] 
10 . Any particular question and answer may be taken down— the Court may, of its own motion or on the 
application of any party or his pleader, take down any particular question and answer, or any objection to any 
question, if there appears to be any special reason for so doing. 
[211]11 . Questions objected to and allowed by Court— Where any question put to a witness is objected to 
by a party or his pleader, and the Court allows the same to be put, the Judge shall take down the question, 
the answer, the objection and the name of the person making it, together with the decision of the Court 
thereon. 
12 . Remarks on demeanour of witnesses— The Court may record such remarks as it thinks material 
respecting the demeanour of any witness while under examination. 
[212][[213]13 . Memorandum of evidence in unappealable cases— In cases in which an appeal is not 
allowed, it shall not be necessary to take down or dictate or record the evidence of the witnesses at length; 
but the Judge, as the examination of each witness proceeds, shall make in writing, or dictate directly on the 
typewriter, or cause to be mechanically recorded, a memorandum of the substance of what the witness 
deposes, and such memorandum shall be signed by the Judge or otherwise authenticated, and shall form 
part of the record.] 
[214]14 . [Judge unable to make such memorandum to record reasons of his liability.] Rep. by the Code of 
Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976 (104 of 1976), s. 69 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
80

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
[215]15 . Power to deal with evidence taken before another Judge— (1) Where a Judge is prevented by 
death, transfer or other cause from concluding the trial of a suit, his successor may deal with any evidence or 
memorandum taken down or made under the foregoing rules as if such evidence or memorandum had been 
taken down or made by him or under his direction under the said rules and may proceed with the suit from 
the stage at which his predecessor left it. 
(2) The provisions of sub-rule (1) shall, so far as they are applicable, be deemed to apply to evidence taken 
in a suit transferred under section 24. 
[216]16 . Power to examine witness immediately— (1) Where a witness is about to leave the jurisdiction of 
the Court, or other sufficient cause is shown to the satisfaction of the Court why his evidence should be 
taken immediately, the Court may upon the application of any party or of the witness, at any time after the 
institution of the suit, take the evidence of such witness in manner herein before provided. 
(2) Where such evidence is not taken forthwith and in the presence of the parties, such notice as the Court 
thinks sufficient, of the day fixed for the examination, shall be given to the parties. 
(3) The evidence so taken shall be read over to the witness, and if he admits it to be correct, shall be signed 
by him, and the Judge shall, if necessary, correct the same, and shall sign it, and it may then be read at any 
hearing of the suit. 
17 . Court may recall and examine witness— The Court may at any stage of a suit recall any witness who 
has been examined and may (subject to the law of evidence for the time being in force) put such questions to 
him as the Court thinks fit. 
[217]17A . Production of evidence not previously known or which could not be produced despite due 
diligence— Where a party satisfies the Court that after the exercise of due diligence, any evidence was not 
within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when that party was leading his evidence, 
the Court may permit that party to produce that evidence at a later stage on such terms as may appear to it 
to be just.] 
18 . Power of Court to inspect— The Court may at any stage of a suit inspect any property or thing 
concerning which any question may arise [218][and where the Court inspects any property or thing it shall, 
as soon as may be practicable, make a memorandum of any relevant facts observed at such inspection and 
such memorandum shall form a part of the record of the suit.] 
ORDER XIX- AFFIDAVITS 
1 . Power to order any point to be proved by affidavit— Any Court may at any time for sufficient reason order 
that any particular fact or facts may be proved by affidavit, or that the affidavit of any witness may be read at 
the hearing, on such conditions as the Court thinks reasonable : 
Provided that where it appears to the Court that either party bona fide desires the production of a witness for 
cross-examination, and that such witness can be produced, an order shall not be made authorizing the 
evidence of such witness to be given by affidavit. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh.— For the existing proviso, substitute the following:— 
"Provided that if it appears to the Court, whether at the instance of either party or otherwise and whether 
before or after the filing of such affidavit, that the production of such witness for cross-examination is 
necessary and his attendance can be procured, the Court shall order the attendance of such witness, 
whereupon the witness may be examined, cross- examined and re-examined.". 
[U.P. Act (57 of 1976)]. 
Madhya Pradesh.— Insert the following rule, after rule 1:— 
"1-A. Proof of fact by affidavit in certain cases.— Notwithstanding anything contrary to rule 1, the Court shall, 
in a suit or proceeding referred to in sub-rule 3-B of Order 1 and whether or not any proceeding under the 
Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1960 are pending before the Competent Authority 
appointed under that Act, call upon the parties to prove any particular fact or facts as it may direct, by 
affidavit, unless the Court looking to the nature and complexity of the suit or proceeding and for reasons to 
be recorded in writing deems it just and expedient to dispense with the proof of a fact or facts by affidavits.". 
81

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[M.P. Act 29 of 1984]. 
2 . Power to order attendance of deponent for cross- examination— (1) Upon any application evidence may 
be given by affidavit, but the Court may, at the instance of either party, order the attendance for cross-
examination of the deponent. 
(2) Such attendance shall be in Court, unless the deponent is exempted from personal appearance in Court 
or the Court otherwise directs. 
3 . Matters to which affidavits shall be confined— (1) Affidavits shall be confined to such facts as the 
deponent is able of his own knowledge to prove, except on interlocutory applications, on which statements of 
his belief may be admitted, provided that the grounds thereof are stated. 
(2) The costs of every affidavit which shall unnecessarily set forth matters of hear say or argumentative 
matter, or copies of or extracts from document, shall (unless the Court otherwise directs) be paid by the party 
filing the same. 
ORDER XX- JUDGMENT AND DECREE 
[219]1 . Judgment when pronounced— [220][(1)] The Court, after the case has been shall pronounce 
judgment in open Court either at once or, as soon thereafter as may be practicable, on some future day; and 
when the judgment is to be pronounced on some future day,the Court shall fix a day for that purpose, of 
which due notice shall be given to the parties or their pleader:] 
[221] [Provided that where the judgment is not pronounced at once, every endeavour shall be made by the 
Court to pronounce the judgment within fifteen days from the date on which the hearing of the case was 
concluded but, where it is not practicable so to do, the Court shall fix a future day for the pronouncement of 
the judgment, and such day shall not ordinarily be a day beyond thirty days from the date on which the 
hearing of the case was concluded, adduce notice of the day so fixed shall be given to the parties or their 
pleader : 
Provided further that, where a judgment is not pronounced within thirty days from the date on which the 
hearing of the case was concluded, the Court shall record the reasons for such delay and shall fix a future 
day on which the judgment will be pronounced and due notice of the day so fixed shall be given to the parties 
or their pleaders]. 
[222] [(2) Where a written judgment is to be pronounced, it shall be sufficient if the findings of the Court on 
each issue and the final order passed in the case are read out and it shall not be necessary for the Court to 
read out the whole judgment, but a copy of the whole judgment shall be made available for the perusal of the 
parties or the pleaders immediately after the judgment is pronounced. 
(3) The judgment may be pronounced by dictation in open Court to a shorthand writer if the Judge is 
specially empowered by the High Court in this behalf: 
Provided that, where the judgment is pronounced by dictation in open Court, the transcript of the judgment 
so pronounced shall, after making such correction therein as may be necessary, be signed by the judge, 
bear the date on which it was pronounced, and form a part of the record.] 
2 . Power to pronounce judgment written by judge's predecessor— [223][A Judge shall] pronounce a 
judgment written, but not pronounced, by his predecessor. 
[224]3 . Judgment to be signed— The judgment shall be dated and signed by the Judge in open Court at the 
time of pronouncing it and, when once signed, shall not afterwards be altered or added, to save as provided 
by section 152 or on review. 
[225]4 . Judgments of Small Cause Courts— (1) Judgments of a Court of Small Causes need not contain 
more than the points for determination and the decision thereon. 
(2) Judgments of other Courts[1]—Judgments of other Courts contain a concise statement of the case, the 
points for determination, the decision thereon, and the reasons for such decision. 
82

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
[226]5 . Court to state its decision on each issue— In suits in which issue, have been framed, the Court shall 
state its finding or decision, with the reasons therefore, upon separate issue, unless the finding upon any one 
or more of the issue is sufficient for the suit. 
[227][5A . Court to inform parties as to where an appeal lies in cases where parties are not represented by 
pleaders— Except where both the parties are represented by pleaders, the Court shall, when it pronounces 
its judgment in a case subject to appeal, inform the parties present in Court as to the Court to which an 
appeal lies and the period of limitation for the filing of such appeal and place on record the information so 
given to the parties.] 
6 . Contents of decree— (1)The decree shall agree with the judgment; it shall contain the number of the suit, 
the [228][names and descriptions of the parties, their registered addresses,] and particulars of the claim and 
shall specify clearly the relief granted or other determination of the suit. 
(2) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the suit, and by whom or out of what property 
and in what proportions such costs are to be paid. 
(3) The Court may direct that the costs payable to one party by the other shall be set off against any sum 
which is admitted or found to be due from the former to the latter. 
[229][6A . Last paragraph of judgment to indicate in precise terms the reliefs granted— (1) The last 
paragraph of the judgment shall state in precise terms the relief which has been granted by such judgment. 
(2) Every endeavour shall be made to ensure that the decree is drawn up as expeditiously as possible, and, 
in any case, within fifteen days from the date on which the judgment is pronounced; but where the decree is 
not drawn up within the time aforesaid, the Court shall if requested so to do by a party desirous of appealing 
against the decree, certify that the decree has not been drawn up and indicate in the certificate the reasons 
for the delay, and thereupon— 
(a) an appeal may be preferred against the decree without filing a copy of the decree and in such a case the 
lst paragraph of the judgment shall, for the purposes of rule 1 of Order XLI, be treated as the decree; and 
(b) so long as the decree is not drawn up, the last paragraph of the judgment shall be deemed to be the 
decree for the purpose of execution and the party interested shall be entitled to apply for a copy of that 
paragraph only without being required to apply for a copy of the whole of the judgment; but as soon as a 
decree is drawn up, the last paragraph of the judgment shall cease to have the effect of decree for the 
purpose of execution or for any other propose : 
Provided that, where an application is made for obtaining a copy of only the last paragraph of the judgment, 
such copy shall indicate the name and address of all the parties to the suit. 
6B . Copies of typewritten judgments when to be made available— Where the judgment is type-written, 
copies of the type-written judgment shall, where it is practicable so to do, be made available to the parties 
immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment on payment, by the party applying for such copy, of 
such charges as may be specified in the rules made by the High Court.] 
7 . Date of decree— The decree shall bear the day on which the judgment was pronounced, and when the 
Judge has satisfied himself that the decree has been drawn up in accordance with the judgment, he shall 
sign the decree. 
8 . Procedure where Judge has vacated office before signing decree— Where a Judge has vacated office 
after pronouncing judgment but without signing the decree, a decree drawn up in accordance with such 
judgment may be signed by his successor or, if the Court has ceased to exist, by the Judge of any Court to 
which such Court was subordinate. 
9 . Decree for recovery of immovable property— Where the subject-matter of the suit is immovable property, 
the decree shall contain a description of such property sufficient to identify the same, and where such 
property can be identified boundaries or by numbers in a record of settlement or survey, the decree shall 
specify such boundaries or numbers. 
10 . Decree for delivery of movable property— Where the suit is for movable property, and the decree is for 
the delivery of such property, the decree shall also state the amount of money to be paid as an alternative if 
delivery cannot be head. 
83

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 . Decree may direct payment by instalments— (1) Where and in so far as a decree is for the payment of 
money, the Court may for any sufficient reason [230][incorporate in the decree after hearing such of the 
parties who had appeared personally or by pleader at the last hearing, before judgment, an order that] 
payment of the amount decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by installments, with or without interest, 
notwithstanding anything contained in the contract under which the money is payable.BUS 
(2) Order, after decree, for payment by instalments—After the passing of any such decree the Court may, on 
the application of the judgment-debtor and with the consent of the decree-holder, order that payment of the 
amount decreed shall be postponed or shall be made by instalments on such terms as to the payment of 
interest, the attachment of the property of the judgment-debtor, or the taking of security from him, or 
otherwise, as it thinks fit. 
12 . Decree for possession and BImesne profits— (1) Where a suit is for the recovery of possession of 
immovable property and for rent or mesne profits, the Court may pass a decree— 
(a) for the possession of the property; 
[231] [(b) for the rents which have accrued on the property during the period prior to the institution of the suit 
or directing an inquiry as to such rent; 
(ba) for the mesne profits or directing an inquiry as to mesne profits;] 
(c) directing an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits from the institution of the suit until— 
(i) the delivery of possession to the decree-holder, 
(ii) the relinquishment of possession by the judgment-debtor with notice to the decree-holder through the 
Court, or 
(iii) the expiration of three years from the date of the decree, whichever event first occurs. 
(2) Where an inquiry is directed under clause (b) or clause (c), a final decree in respect of the rent or mesne 
profits shall be passed in accordance with the result of such inquiry. 
[232][12A . Decree for specific performance of contract for the sale or lease of immovable property— Where 
a decree for the specific performance of contract for the sale or lease of immovable property orders that the 
purchase money or other sum be paid by the purchaser or lessee, it shall specify the period within which the 
payment shall be made.] 
13 . Decree in administration suit— (1) Where a suit is for an account of any property and for its due 
administration under the decree of the Court, the Court shall, before passing the final decree, pass a 
preliminary decree ordering such accounts and inquiries to be taken and made, and giving such other 
directions as it thinks fit. 
(2) In the administration by the Court of the property of any deceased person, if such property proves to be 
insufficient for the payment in full of his debts and liabilities, the same rules shall be observed as to the 
respective rights of secured and unsecured creditors and as to debts and liabilities provable, and as to the 
valuation of annuities and future and contingent liabilities respectively, as may be in force for the time being, 
within the local limits of the Court in which the administration suit, is pending with respect to the estates of 
persons adjudged or declared insolvent, and all persons who in any such case would be entitled to be paid 
out of such property, may come in under the preliminary decree, and make such claims against the same as 
they may respectively be entitled to by virtue of this Code. 
14 . Decree in pre-emption suit— (1) Where the Court decrees a claim to pre-emption in respect of a 
particular sale of property and the purchase-money has not been paid into Court, the decree shall— 
(a) specify a day on or before which the purchase-money shall be so paid, and 
(b) direct that on payment into Court of such purchase-money, together with the costs (if any) decrees 
against the plaintiff, on or before the day referred to in clause (a), the defendant shall deliver possession of 
the property to the plaintiff, whose title thereto shall be deemed to have accused from the date of such 
payment, but that, if the purchase-money and the costs (if any) are not so paid, the suit shall be dismissed 
with costs. 
(2) Where the Court has adjudicated upon rival claims to pre-emption, the decree shall direct,— 
84

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) if and in so far as the claims decreed are equal in degree, that the claim of each pre-emptor complying 
with the provisions of sub-rule (1) shall take effect in respect of a proportionate share of the property 
including any proportionate share in respect of which the claim of any pre-emptor failing to comply with the 
said provisions would but for such default, have taken effect; and 
(b) if and in so far as the claims decreed are different in degree, that the claim of the inferior pre-emption 
shall not take effect unless and until the superior pre-emptor has failed to comply with the said provisions. 
15 . Decree in suit for dissolution of partnership— Where a suit is for the dissolution of partnership, or the 
taking of partnership accounts, the Court, before passing a final decree, may pass a preliminary decree 
declaring the proportionate shares of the parties, fixing the day on which the partnership shall stand 
dissolved or be deemed to have been dissolved, and directing such accounts to be taken, and other acts to 
be done, as it thinks fit. 
16 . Decree in suit for account between principal and agent— In a suit for an account of pecuniary 
transactions between a principal and an agent, and in any other suit not herein before provided for, where it 
is necessary, in order to ascertain the amount of money due to or from any party, that an account should be 
taken, the Court shall, before passing its final decree, pass preliminary decree directing such accounts to be 
taken as it thinks fit. 
17 . Special directions as to accounts— The Court may either by the decree directing an account to be taken 
or by any subsequent order give special directions with regard to the mode in which the account is to be 
taken or vouched and in particular may direct that in taking the account the books of account in which the 
accounts in question have been kept shall be taken as prima facie evidence of the truth of the matters 
therein contained with liberty to the parties interested to take such objection thereto as they may be advised. 
18 . Decree in suit for partition of property or separate possession of a share therein— Where the Court 
passes a decree for the partition of property or for the separate possession of a share therein, then,— 
(1) if and in so far as the decree relates to an estate assessed to the payment of revenue to the Government, 
the decree shall declare the rights of the several parties interested in the property, but shall direct such 
partition or separation to be made by the Collector, or any gazetted subordinate of the Collector deputed by 
him in this behalf, in accordance with such declaration and with the provisions of section 54; 
(2) if and in so far as such decree relates to any other immovable property or to movable property, the Court 
may, if the partition or separation cannot be conveniently made without further inquiry, pass a preliminary 
decree declaring the right of the several parties interested in the property and giving such further directions 
as may be required. 
19 . Decree when set-off or counter-claims is allowed— (1) Where the defendant has been allowed a set-off 
[233] [or counter-claim] against the claim of the plaintiff, the decree shall state what amount is due to the 
plaintiff and what amount is due to the defendant, and shall be for the recovery of any sum which appears to 
be due to either party. 
(2) Appeal from decree relating to set-off or counter-claim—Any decree passed in a suit in which a set-off 
[234][or counter-claim] is claimed shall be subject to the same provisions in respect of appeal to which it 
would have been subject if not set-off [235] [or counter-claim] had been claimed. 
(3) The provisions of this rule shall apply whether the set-off is admissible under rule 6 of Order VIII or 
otherwise. 
20 . Certified copies of judgment and decree to be furnished— Certified copies of the judgment and decree 
shall be furnished to the parties on application to the Court, and at their expense. 
[236]ORDER XXA 
COSTS 
1 . Provisions relating to certain items— Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this Code 
relating to costs, the Court may award costs in respect of,— 
(a) expenditure incurred for the giving of any notice required to be given by law before the institution of the 
suit; 
85

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) expenditure incurred on any notice which, though not required to be given by law, has been given by any 
party to the suit to any other party before the institution of the suit; 
(c) expenditure incurred on the typing, writing or printing of pleadings filed by any party; 
(d) charges paid by a party for inspection of the records of the Court for the purposes of the suit; 
(e) expenditure incurred by a party for producing witnesses, even though not summoned through Court, and 
(f) in the case of appeals, charges incurred by a party for obtaining any copies of judgments and decrees 
which are required to be filed along with the memorandum of appeal. 
2 . Costs to be awarded in accordance with the rules made by High Court— The award of costs under this 
rule shall be in accordance with such rules as the High Court may make in that behalf.] 
ORDER XXI-EXECUTION OF DECREES AND ORDERS 
Payment under decree 
[237][1 . Modes of paying money under decree— (1) All money, payable under a decree shall be paid as 
follows, namely :— 
(a) by deposit into the Court whose duty it is to execute the decree, or sent to that Court by postal money 
order or through a bank; or 
(b) out of Court, to the decree-holder by postal money order or through a bank or by any other mode wherein 
payment is evidenced in writing; or 
(c) otherwise, as the Court which made the decree, directs. 
(2) Where any payment is made under clause (a) or clause (c) of sub rule (1), the judgment-debtor shall give 
notice thereof to the decree-holder either through the Court or directly to him by registered post, 
acknowledgement due. 
(3) Where money is paid by postal money order or through a bank under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-rule 
(1), the money order or payment through bank, as the case may be, shall accurately state the following 
particulars, namely : — 
(a) the number of the original suit; 
(b) the names of the parties or where there are more than two plaintiffs or more than two defendants, as the 
case may be, the names of the first two plaintiffs and the first two defendants; 
(c) how the money remitted is to be adjusted, that is to say, whether it is towards the principal, interest or 
costs; 
(d) the number of the execution case of the Court, where such case is pending; and 
(e) the name and address of the payer. 
(4) On any amount paid under clause (a) or clause (c) of sub-rule (1) interest, if any, shall cease to run from 
the date of service of the notice referred to in sub-rule (2). 
(5) On any amount paid under clause (b) of sub-rule (1) interest, if any, shall cease to run from the date of 
such payment : 
Provided that, where the decree-holder refuses to accept the postal order or payment through a bank, 
interest shall cease to run from the date on which the money was tendered to him, or where he avoids 
acceptance of the postal money order or payment through bank, interest shall cease to run from the date on 
which money would have been tendered to him in the ordinary course of business of the postal authorities or 
the bank, as the case may be.] 
2 . Payment out of Court to decree-holder— (1) Where any money payable under a decree of any kind is 
paid out of Court. [238][or decree of any kind is otherwise adjusted] in whole or in part to the satisfaction of 
the decree-holder, the decree- holder shall certify such payment or adjustment to the Court whose duty it is 
to execute the decree, and the Court shall record the same accordingly. 
86

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) The judgment-debtor [239][or any person who has become surety for the judgment-debtor] also may 
inform the Court of such payment or adjustment, and apply to the Court to issue a notice to the decree-
holder to show cause, on a day to be fixed by the Court, why such payment or adjustment should not be 
recorded as certified; and if, after service of such notice, the decree-holder fails to show cause why the 
payment or adjustment should not be recorded as certified, the Court record the same accordingly. 
[240] [(2A) No payment or adjustment shall be recorded at the instance of the judgment- debtor unless— 
(a) the payment is made in the manner provided in rule 1; or 
(b) the payment or adjustment is proved by documentary evidence; or 
(c) the payment or adjustment is admitted by, or on behalf of, the decree-holder in his reply to the notice 
given under sub-rule (2) of rule 1, on before the Court.] 
[241] (3) A payment or adjustment, which has not been certified or recorded as aforesaid, shall not be 
recognized by any Court executing the decree. 
Courts executing decrees 
3 . Lands situate in more than one jurisdiction— Where immovable property forms one estate or tenure 
situate within the local limits of jurisdiction of two or more Court, any one of such Courts may attach and sell 
the entire estate or tenure. 
4 . Transfer to Court of Small Causes— Where a decree has been passed in a suit of which the value as set 
forth in the plaint did not exceed two thousand rupees and which, as regards its subject-matter, is not 
excepted by the law for the time being in force from the cognizance of either a Presidency or a Provincial 
Court of Small Causes, and the Court which passed it wishes it to be executed in Calcutta, Madras or 
Bombay, such Court may send to the Court of Small Causes in Calcutta, Madras or Bombay, as the case 
may be, the copies and certificates mentioned in rule 6; and such Court of Small Causes shall thereupon 
execute the decree as if it had been passed by itself. 
[242][5 . Mode of transfer— Where a decree is to be sent for execution to another Court, the Court which 
passed such decree shall send the decree directly to such other Court whether or not such Court is situated 
in the same State, but the Court to which the decree is sent for execution shall, if it has no jurisdiction to 
execute the decree, send it to the Court having such jurisdiction.] 
6 . Procedure where Court desires that its own decree shall be executed by another Court— The Court 
sending a decree for execution shall send— 
(a) a copy of the decree; 
(b) a certificate setting forth that satisfaction of the decree has not been obtained by execution within the 
jurisdiction of the Court by which it was passed, or, where the decree has been executed in part, the extent 
to which satisfaction has been obtained and what part of the decree remains unsatisfied; and 
(c) a copy of any order for the execution of the decree, or, if no such order has been made, a certificate to 
that effect. 
7 . Court receiving copies of decree, etc. to file same without proof— The Court to which a decree is so sent 
shall cause such copes and certificates to be filed, without any further proof of the decree or order for 
execution, or of the copies thereof, unless the Court, for any special reasons to be recorded under the hand 
of the Judge, requires such proof. 
8 . Execution of decree or order by Court to which it is sent— Where such copies are so filed, the decree or 
order may, if the Court to which it is sent is the District Court, be executed by such or be transferred for 
execution to any subordinate Court of competent jurisdiction. 
9 . Execution of High Court of decree transferred by other Court— Where the Court to which the decree is 
sent for execution is a High Court, the decree shall be executed by such Court in the same manner as if it 
had been passed by such Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction. 
Application for execution 
87

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
10 . Application for execution— Where the holder of a decree desires to execute it, he shall apply to the 
Court which passed the decree or to the officer (if any) appointed in this behalf, or if the decree has been 
sent under the provisions hereinbefore contained to another Court then to such Court or to the proper officer 
thereof. 
11 . Oral application— (1) Where a decree is for the payment of money the Court may, on the oral 
application of the decree-holder at the time of passing of the decree, order immediate execution thereof by 
the arrest of the judgment-debtor, prior to the preparation of a warrant if he is within the precincts of the 
Court. 
(2) Written application—Save as otherwise provided by sub-rule(1), every application for the execution of a 
decree shall be in writing, signed and verified by the applicant or by some other person proved to the 
satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case, and shall contain in a tabular form the 
following particulars, namely— 
(a) the number of the suit; 
(b) the names of the parties; 
(c) the date of the decree; 
(d) whether any appeal has been preferred from the decree; 
(e) whether any, and (if any) what, payment or other adjustment of the matter in controversy has been made 
between the parties subsequently to the decree; 
(f) whether any, and (if any) what, previous applications have been made for the execution of the decree, the 
dates of such applications and their results; 
(g) the amount with interest (if any) due upon the decree, or other relief granted thereby, together with 
particulars of any cross-decree, whether passed before or after the date of the decree sought to be 
executed; 
(h) the amount of the costs (if any) awarded; 
(i) the name of the person against whom execution of the decree is sought; and 
(j) the mode in which the assistance of the Court is required whether— 
(i) by the delivery of any property specifically decreed; 
[243] [(ii) by the attachment, or by the attachment and sale, or by the sale without attachment, of any 
property;] 
(iii) by the arrest and detention in prison of any person; 
(iv) by the appointment of a receiver; 
(v) otherwise, as the nature of the relief granted may require. 
(3) The Court to which an application is made under sub-rule (2) may require the applicant to produce a 
certified copy of the decree. 
[244][11A . Application for arrest to state grounds— Where an application is made for the arrest and 
detention in prison of the judgment-debtor, it shall state, or be accompanied by an affidavit stating, the 
grounds on which arrest is applied for.] 
12 . Application for attachment of movable property not in judgment-debtor's possession— Where an 
application is made for the attachment of any movable property belonging to a judgment-debtor in his 
possession, the decree-holder shall annex to the application an inventory of the property to be attached, 
containing a reasonably accurate description of the same. 
13 . Application for attachment of immovable property to contain certain particulars— Where an application is 
made for the attachment of any immovable property belonging to a judgment-debtor, it shall contain at the 
foot— 
88

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) a description such property sufficient to identify the same and, in case such property can be identified by 
boundaries or numbers in a record of settlement or survey, a specification of such boundaries or numbers; 
and 
(b) a specification of the judgment-debtor's share or interest in such property to the best of the belief of the 
applicant, and so far as he has been able to ascertain the same. 
14 . Power to require certified extract from Collector's register in certain cases— Where an application is 
made for the attachment of any land which is registered in the office of the Collector, the Court may require 
the applicant to produce a certified extract from the register of such office, specifying the persons registered 
as proprietors of, or as possessing any transferable interest in, the land or its revenue, or as liable to pay 
revenue for the land, and the shares of the registered proprietors. 
15 . Application for execution by joint decree-holders— (1) Where a decree has been passed jointly in favour 
of more persons than one, any one or more such persons may, unless the decree imposes any condition to 
the contrary, apply for the execution of the whole decree for the benefit of them all, or, where of them has 
died, for the benefit of the survivors and the legal representatives of the deceased. 
(2) Where the Court sees sufficient cause for allowing the decree to be executed on an application made 
under this rule, it shall make such order as it deems necessary for protecting the interest of the persons who 
have not joined in the application. 
16 . Application for execution by transferee of decree— Where a decree or, if a decree has been passed 
jointly in favour of two or more persons, the interest of any decree-holder in the decree in transferred by 
assignment in writing or by operation of law, the transferee may apply for execution of the decree to the 
Court which passed if, and the decree may be executed in the same manner and subject to the same 
conditions as if the application were made by such decree-holder : 
Provided also that, where the decree, or such interest as aforesaid, has been transferred by assignment, 
notice of such application shall be given to the transferor and the judgment-debtor, and the decree shall not 
be executed until the Court has heard their objections (if any) to its execution : 
Provided also that, where a decree for the payment of money against two or more persons has been 
transferred to one of them, it shall not be executed against the others. 
[245] [Explanation.—Nothing in this rule shall affect the provisions of section 146, and a transferee of rights 
in the property, which is the subject matter of the suit, may apply for execution of the decree without a 
separate assignment of the decree as required by this rule.] 
17 . Procedure on receiving application for execution of decree— (1) On receiving an application for the 
execution of a decree as provided by rule 11, sub-rule (2), the Court shall ascertain whether such of the 
requirement's of rules 11 to 14 as may be applicable to the case have been complied with; and if, they have 
not been complied with, [246][the Court shall allow] the defect to be remedied then and there or within a time 
to be fixed by it. 
[247] [(1A) If the defect is not so remedied, the Court shall reject the application: 
Provided that where, in the Court, there is some inaccuracy as to the amount referred to in clauses (g) and 
(h) of sub-rule (2) of rule 11, the Court, instead of rejecting the application, decide provisonally (without 
prejudice to the right of the parties to have the amount finally decided in the course of the proceedings) the 
amount and make an order for the execution of the decree for the amount so provisionally decided.] 
(2) Where an application is amended under the provisions of sub-rule (1), it shall be deemed to have been 
an application in accordance with law and presented on the date when it was first presented. 
(3) Every amendment made under this rule shall be signed or initialled by the Judge. 
(4) When the application is admitted, the Court shall enter in the proper register a note of the application and 
the date on which it was made, and shall, subject to the provisions hereinafter contained, order execution of 
the decree according to the nature of the application: 
Provided that, in the case of a decree for the payment of money, the value of the property attached shall, as 
nearly as may be, correspond with the amount due under the decree. 
89

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18 . Execution in case of cross-decrees— (1) Where applications are made to a Court for the execution of 
cross-decrees in separate suits for the payment of two sums of money passed between the same parties 
and capable of execution at the same time by such Court, then— 
(a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction shall be entered upon both decrees; and 
(b) if the two sums are unequal execution may be taken out only by the holder of the decree for the larger 
sum and for so much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum, and satisfaction for the smaller sum 
shall be entered on the decree for the larger sum as well as satisfaction on the decree for the smaller sum. 
(2) This rule shall be deemed to apply where either party is an assignee of one of the decrees and as well in 
respect of judgment-debts due by the original assignor as in respect of judgment-debts due by the assignee 
himself. 
(3) This rule shall not be deemed to apply unless— 
(a) the decree holder in one of the suits which the decrees have been made is the judgment-debtor in the 
other and each party files the same character in both suits; and 
(b) the sums due under the decrees are definite. 
(4) The holder of a decree passed against several persons jointly and severally my treat is as a cross-decree 
in relation to a decree against him singly in favour of one or more of such persons. 
Illustrations 
(a) A holds a decree against B for Rs. 1,000. B holds a decree against A for the payment of Rs. 1,000 in 
case A fails to deliver certain goods at a future day. B cannot treat his decree as a cross-decree under this 
rule. 
(b) A and B, co-plaintiffs, obtain a decree for Rs. 1,000 against C, and C obtain a decree for Rs. 1,000 1,000 
against B. C cannot treat his decree as a cross-decree under this rule. 
(c) A obtains a decree against B for Rs. 1,000 C, who is a trustee for B, obtains a decree on behalf of B 
against A for Rs. 1,000 B cannot treat C's decree as a cross-decree under this rule. 
(d) A, B, C, D and E are jointly and severely liable for Rs. 1,000 under a decree obtained by F. A obtains a 
decree for Rs. 1,000 against F singly and applies for execution to the Court in which the joint-decree is being 
executed. F may treat his joint-decree as cross-decree under this rule. 
19 . Execution in case of cross-claims under same decree— Where application is made to a Court for the 
execution of a decree under which two parties are entitled to recover sums of money from each other, then— 
(a) if the two sums are equal, satisfaction for both shall be entered upon the decree; and 
(b) if the two sums are unequal, execution may be taken out only by the party entitled to the larger sum and 
for so much only as remains after deducting the smaller sum, and satisfaction for the smaller sum shall be 
entered upon the decree. 
20 . Cross-decrees and cross-claims in mortgage-suits— The provisions contained in rules 18 and 19 shall 
apply to decrees for sale in enforcement of a mortgage or charge. 
21 . Simultaneous execution— The Court may, in its discretion, refuse execution at the same time against 
the person and property of the judgment-debtor. 
22 . Notice to show cause against execution in certain cases— (1) Where an application for execution is 
made,— 
(a) more than [248][two years] after the date of the decree, or 
(b) against the legal representative of a party to the decree or where an application is made for execution of 
a decree filed under the provisions of section 44A,[249][or] 
[250] [(c) against the assignee or receiver in insolvency, where the party to the decree has been adjudged to 
be an insolvent,] 
90

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Court executing the decree shall issue a notice to the person against whom execution is applied for 
requiring him to show cause, on a date to be fixed, why the decree should not be executed against him : 
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary in consequence of more than [251][two years] having 
elapsed between the date of the decree and the application for execution if the application is made within 
[252][two years] from the date of the last order against the party against whom execution is applied for, made 
on any previous application for execution, or in consequence of the application being made against the legal 
representative of the judgment-debtor if upon a previous application for execution against the same person 
the Court has ordered execution to issue against him. 
(2) Nothing in the foregoing sub-rule shall be deemed to preclude the Court from issuing any process in 
execution of a decree without issuing the notice thereby prescribed, if, for reasons to be recorded, it 
considers that the issue of such notice would cause unreasonable delay or would defeat the ends of justice. 
[253][22A . Sale not to be set aside on the death of the judgment-debtor before the sale but after the service 
of the proclamation of sale.— Where any property is sold in execution of a decree, the sale shall not be set 
aside merely by reason of the death of the judgment-debtor between the date of issue of the proclamation of 
sale and the date of the sale notwithstanding the failure of the decree-holder to substitute the legal 
representative of such deceased judgment-debtor, but, in case of such failure, the Court may set aside the 
sale if it is satisfied that the legal representative of the deceased judgment-debtor has been prejudiced by the 
sale.] 
23 . Procedure after issue of notice— (1) Where the person to whom notice is issued under [254][rule 22] 
does not appear or does not show cause to the satisfaction of the Court why the decree should not be 
executed the Court shall order the decree to be executed. 
(2) Where such person offers any objection to the execution of the decree, the Court shall consider such 
objection and make such order as it thinks fit. 
Process for execution 
24 . Process for execution— (1) When the preliminary measures (if any) required by the foregoing rules have 
been taken, the Court shall, unless it sees cause to the contrary, issue its process for the execution of the 
decree. 
(2) Every such process shall bear date the day on which it is issued, and shall be signed by the Judge or 
such officer as the Court may appoint in this behalf, and shall be sealed with the seal of the Court and 
delivered to the proper officer to be executed. 
[255] [(3)] In every such process, a day shall be specified on or before which it shall be executed and a day 
shall also be specified on or before which it shall be returned to the Court, but no process shall be deemed to 
be void if no day for its return is specified therein.] 
25 . Endorsement on process— (1) The officer entrusted with the execution of the process shall endorse 
thereon the day on, and the manner in which it was executed, and, if the latest day specified in the process 
for the return thereof has been exceeded, the reason of the delay, or, if it is executed, the reason why it was 
not executed, and shall return the process with such endorsement to the Court. 
(2) Where the endorsement is to the effect that such officer is unable to execute the process, the Court shall 
examine him touching his alleged inability, and may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine witnesses as to 
such inability, and shall record the result. 
Stay of execution 
26 . When Court may stay execution— (1) the Court to which a decree has been sent for execution shall, 
upon sufficient cause being shown, stay the execution of such decree for a reasonable time, to enable the 
judgment-debtor to apply to the Court by which the decree was passed, or to any Court having appellate 
jurisdiction in respect of the decree or the execution thereof, for an order to stay execution, or for any other 
order relating to the decree or execution which might have been made by such Court of first instance or 
Appellate Court if execution had been issued thereby, or if application for execution had been made thereto. 
(2) Where the property or person of the judgment-debtor has been seized under an execution, the Court 
which issued the execution may order the restitution of such property or the discharge of such person 
pending the result of the application. 
91

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) Power to require security from, or impose conditions upon, judgment-debtor—Before making an order to 
stay execution, or for the restitution of property or the discharge of the judgment-debtor, [256][the Court shall 
require] such security from, or impose such conditions upon, the judgment-debtor as it thinks fit. 
27 . Liability of judgment-debtor discharged— No order of restitution or discharge under rule 26 shall prevent 
the property or person of a judgment-debtor from being retaken in execution of the decree sent for execution. 
28 . Order of Court which passed decree or of Appellate Court to be binding upon Court applied to— Any 
order of the Court by which the decree was passed, or of such Court of appeal as aforesaid, in relation to the 
execution of such decree, shall be binding upon the Court to which the decree was sent for execution. 
29 . Stay of execution pending suit between decree-holder and judgment-debtor— Where a suit is pending in 
any Court against the holder of a decree of such Court [257] [or of a decree which is being executed by such 
Court], on the part of the person against whom the decree was passed, the Court may, on such terms as to 
security or otherwise, as it thinks fit, stay execution of the decree until the pending suit has been decided : 
[258] [Provided that if the decree is one for payment of money, the Court shall, if it grants stay without 
requiring security, record its reasons for so doing.] 
Mode of execution 
30 . Decree for payment of money— Every decree for the payment of money, including a decree for the 
payment of money as the alternative to some other relief, may be executed by the detention in the civil prison 
of the judgment-debtor, or by the attachment and sale of his property, or by both. 
31 . Decree for specific movable property— (1) Where the decree is for any specific movable, or for any 
share in a specific movable, it may be executed by the seizure, if practicable, of the movable or share, and 
by the delivery thereof to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such person as he appoints to 
receive delivery on his behalf, or by the detention in the civil prison of the judgment-debtor, or by the 
attachment of his property, or by both. 
(2) Where any attachment under sub-rule (1) has remained in force for [259][three months] if the judgment-
debtor has not obeyed the decree and the decree-holder has applied to have the attached property sold, 
such property may be sold, and out of the proceeds the Court may award to the decree-holder, in cases 
where any amount has been fixed by the decree to be paid as an alternative to delivery of movable property, 
such amount, and, in other cases, such compensation as it thinks fit, and shall pay the balance (if any) to the 
judgment-debtor on his application. 
(3) Where the judgment-debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all costs of executing the same which he is 
bound to pay, or where, at the end of [260][three months] from the date of attachment, no application to have 
the property sold has been made, or, if made, has been refused, the attachment shall cease. 
32 . Decree for specific performance for restitution of conjugal rights, or for an injunction— (1) Where the 
party against whom a decree for the specific performance of a contract, or for restitution of conjugal rights, or 
for an injunction, has been passed, has had an opportunity of obeying the decree and has wilfully failed to 
obey it, the decree may be enforced in the case of a decree for restitution of conjugal rights by the 
attachment of his property or, in the case of a decree for the specific performance of a contract or for an 
injunction by his detention in the civil prison, or by the attachment of his property, or by both. 
(2) Where the party against whom a decree for specific performance or for an injunctions been passed is a 
corporation, the decree may be enforced by the attachment of the property of the corporation or, with the 
leave of the Court by the detention in the civil prison of the directors or other principal officers thereof, or by 
both attachment and detention. 
(3) Where any attachment under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) has remained in force for [261][six months] if the 
judgment-debtor has not obeyed the decree and the decree-holder has applied to have the attached property 
sold, such property may be sold; and out of the proceeds the Court may award to the decree-holder such 
compensation s it thinks fit, and shall pay the balance (if any) to the judgment-debtor on his application. 
(4) Where the judgment-debtor has obeyed the decree and paid all costs of executing the same which he is 
bound to pay, or here, at the end of [262][six months] from the date of the attachment, no application to have 
the property sold has been made, or if made has been refused, the attachment shall cease. 
92

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(5) Where a decree for the specific performance of a contract or for an injunction has not been obeyed, the 
Court may, in lieu of or in addition to all or any of the processes aforesaid, direct that the act required to be 
done may be done so far as practicable by the decree-holder or some other person appointed by the Court, 
at the cost of the judgment-debtor, and upon the act being done the expenses incurred may be ascertained 
in such manner as the Court may direct and may be recovered as if they were included in the decree. 
Illustration 
A, a person of little substance, effects a building which renders uninhbitable a family mansion belonging to B. 
A, in spite of his detention in prison and the attachment of his property, declines to obey a decree obtained 
against him by B and directing him to revoe the building. The Court is of opinion that no sum realizable by 
the sale of A's property wold adequately compensate B for the depreciation in the value of his mansion. B 
may apply to the Court to remove the building and may revocer the cost of such removal from a in the 
execution-proceedings. 
33 . Discretion of Court in executing decrees for restitution of conjugl rights— (1) Notwithstanding anything in 
rule 32, the Court, either at the time of passing a decree agaisnt a husband for the restitution of conjugal 
rights or at any time afterwards, may order that the decree shall be executed in the manner provided in this 
rule. 
(2) Where the Court has made an order under sub-rule (1), it may order that, in the event of the decree not 
being obeyed within such period as may be fixed in this behalf, the judgment-debtor shall make to the 
decree-holder such periodical payments as may be just, and, if it thinks fit, require that the judgment-debtor 
shall, to its satisfaction, secure to the decree-holder such periodical payments. 
(3) The Court may from time to time vary or modify any order made under sub-rule (2) for the periodical 
payment of money, either by altering the times of payment or by increasing or diminishing the amount, or 
may temporilay suspend the same as to the whole or any part of the money so ordered to be paid, and again 
review the same, either wholly or in part as it may think just. 
(4) Any money ordered to be paid under this rule may be recovered as though it were payble under a decree 
for the payment of money. 
34 . Decree for executin of document, or endoresment of negotiable instrument— (1) Where a decree is for 
the execution of a document or for the endorsement for a negotiable instrument and the judgment-debtor 
neglects or refuses to obey the decree, the decree-holder may prepare a draft of the document or 
endoresement in accordance with the terms of the decree and delvier the same to the Court. 
(2) The Court shall thereupon cause the draft to beserved on the judgment-debtor together with a notice 
requiring his objections (if any) to be made within such time as the Cout fixes in this behalf. 
(3) Where the judgment-debtor object tot he draft, his objections shall be stated in writing within such time, 
and the court shall make such order approving or altering the draft, as it thinks fit. 
(4) The decree-holder shall deliver to the Court a copy of the draft with such alterations (if any) as the Court 
may have directed upon the proper stamp-paper if a stamp is required by the law for the time being in force; 
and the Judge or such officer as may be appointed in this behalf shall execute the document so delivered. 
(5) The execution of a document or the endorsement of a negotiable instrument under this rule may be in the 
following form, namely :— 
"C.D., Judge of the Court of 
(or as the case may be), for A.B. in suit by E.F. against A.B." 
and shall have the same effect as the execution of the document or the endorsement of the negotiable 
instrument by the party ordered to execute or endorese the same. 
[263] [(6) (a) Where the registration of the document is required under any law for the time being in force, the 
Court, or such officer of the court as may be authorised in this behalf by the Court, shall cause the document 
to be registered in accordance with such law. 
(b) Where the registration of the doucment is not so required, but the decree-holder desires it to be 
registered, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit. 
93

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) Where the Court makes any order for the registration of any document, it may make such order as it 
thinkgs fit as to the expenses of registration.] 
35 . Decree for immovable property— (1) Where a decree is for the delivery of any immovable property, 
possession thereof shall be delviered to the party to whom it has been adjudged, or to such person as he 
may appoint to receive delivery on his behalf, and, if necessary, by removing any person bound by the 
decree who refuses to vacate the property. 
(2) Where a decree is for the joint possession of immovable property, such possession shall be delivered by 
afixing a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the property and proclamining the beat of drum, 
or other customary mode, at some convenient place, the substance of the decree. 
(3) Where possession of any building on enclosure is to be delivered and the person in possession, being 
bound by the decree, does not afford free access, the Court, through its officers, may, after giving 
reasonable warning and facility to any woman not appearing in public according to the customs of the 
country to withdraw, remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any door or do any other act necessary 
for putting the decree-holder in possession. 
36 . Decree for delivery of immovable property when in occupancy of tenant— Where a decree is for the 
delivery of any immovable property in the occupancy of a tenant or other person entitled to occupy the same 
and not bound by the decree to relinguish such occupancy, the Court shall order delivery to be made by 
affixing a copy of the warrant in some conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to the occupant by 
beat of drum or other customary mode, at some convenient place, the substance of the decree in regard to 
the property. 
Arrest and detention in the civil prison 
37 . Discretionary power to permit judgment debtor to show cause against detention in prison— (1) 
Notwithstanding anything in these rules, where an application is for the execution of a decree for the 
payment of money by the arrest and detention in the civil prison of a judgment-debtor who is liable to be 
arrested in pursuance of the application, the Court shall, instead of issuing a warrant for his arrest, issue a 
notice calling upon him to appear before the Court on a day to be specified in the notice and show cause 
why he should not be committed to the civil prison: 
Provided that such notice shall not be necessary if the Court is satisfied, by affidavit, or otherwise, that, with 
the object or effect of delaying the execution of the decree,the judgment- debtor is likely to abscond or leave 
the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court. 
38 . Warrant for arrest to direct judgment-debtor to be brought up— Every warrant for the arrest of a 
judgment-debtor shall direct the officer entrusted with its execution to bring him before the Court with all 
convenient speed, unless the amount which he has been ordered to pay, together with the interest thereon 
and the costs (if any) to which he is liable, be sooner paid. 
39 . Subsistence allowance— (1) No judgment-debtor shall be arrested in execution of a decree unless and 
until the decree-holder into Court such sum as the Judge thinks sufficient for the subsistence of the 
judgment- debtor from the time of his arrest until he can be brought before the Court. 
(2) Where a judgment-debtor is committed to the civil prison in execution of a decree, the Court shall fix for 
his subsistence such monthly allowance as he may be entitled to according to the seales fixed under section 
57, or, where no such scales have been fixed, as it considers sufficient with reference to the class to which 
he belongs. 
(3) The monthly allowance fixed by the Court shall be supplied by the party on whose application the 
judgment-debtor has been arrested by monthly payments in advance before the first day of each month. 
(4) The first payment shall be made to the proper officer of the Court for such portion of the current month as 
remains unexpired before the judgment-debtor is committed to the civil prison, and the subsequent payments 
(if any) shall be made to the officer in charge of the civil prison. 
(5) Sums disbursed by the decree-holder for the subsistence of the judgment-debtor in the civil prison shall 
be deemed to be costs in the suit : 
Provided that the judgment-debtor shall not be detained in the civil prison or arrested on account of any sum 
so disbursed. 
94

 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
40 . Proceedings on appearance of judement-debtor in obedience to notice or after arrest— (1) When a 
judgment-debtor appears before the Court in obedience to a notice issued under rule 37, or is brought before 
the Court after being arrested in execution of a decree for the payment of money, the Court shall proceed to 
hear the decree-holder and take all such evidence as may be produced by him in support of his application 
for execution and shall then give the judgment-debtor an opportunity of showing cause why he should not be 
committed to the civil prison. 
(2) Pending the conclusion of the inquiry under sub-rule (1) the Court may, in its discretion, order the 
judgment-debtor to be detained in the custody of an officer of the Court or release him on his furnishing 
security to the satisfaction of the Court for his appearance when required. 
(3) Upon the conclusion of the inquiry under sub-rule (1) the Court may, subject to the provisions of section 
51 and to the other provisions of the Code, make an order for the detention of the judgment-debtor in the civil 
prison and shall in that event cause him to be arrested if he is not already under arrest: 
Provided that in order to give the judgment-debtor an opportunity of satisfying the decree, the Court may, 
before making the order of detention, leave the judgment-debtor in the custody of an officer of the Court for a 
specified period not exceeding fifteen days or release him on his furnishing security to the satisfaction of the 
Court for his appearance at the expiration of the specified period if the decree be not sooner satisfied. 
(4) A judgment-debtor released under this rule may be re-arrested. 
(5) When the Court does not make an order of detention under sub-rule (3), it shall disallow the application 
and, if the judgment-debtor is under arrest, direct his release. 
Attachment of property 
41 . Examination of judgment-debtor as to his property— [264][(1)] Where a decree is for the payment of 
money the decree-holder may apply to the Court for an order that— 
(a) The judgment-debtor, or 
(b) [265][where the judgment-debtor is a corporation], any officer thereof, or 
(c) any other person, 
be orally examined as to whether any or what debts are owing to the judgment-debtor and whether the 
judgment-debtor has any and what other property or means of satisfying the decree; and the Court may 
make an order for the attendance and examination of such judgment-debtor, or officer or other person, and 
for the production of any books or documents. 
[266] [(2) Where a decree for the payment of money has remained unsatisfied for a period of thirty days, the 
Court may, on the application of the decree-holder and without prejudice to its power under sub-rule (1), by 
order require the judgment-debtor or where the judgment-debtor is a corporation, any officer thereof, to make 
an affidavit stating the particulars of the assets of the judgment-debtor. 
(3) In case of disobedience of any order made under sub-rule (2), the Court making the order, or any Court 
to which the proceeding is transferred, may direct that the person disobeying the order be detained in the 
civil prison for a term not exceeding three months unless before the expiry of such term the Court directs his 
release.] 
42 . Attachment in case of decree for rent or mesne profits or other matter, amount of which to be 
subsequently determined— Where a decree directs an inquiry as to rent or mesne profits or any other 
matter, the property of the judgment-debtor may, before the amount due from him has been ascertained, be 
attached, as in the case of an ordinary decree for the payment of money. 
43 . Attachment of movable property, other than agricultural produce, in possession of judgment-debtor— 
Where the property to be attached is movable property, other than agricultural produce, in the possession of 
the judgment-debtor, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure, and the attaching officer shall keep the 
property in his own custody or in the custody of one of his subordinates, and shall be responsible for the due 
custody thereof: 
Provided that, when the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay, or when the expense of 
keeping it in custody is likely to exceed its value, the attaching officer may sell it at once. 
95

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
[267][43A . Custody of movable property— (1) Where the property attached consists of live-stock, 
agricultural implements or other articles which cannot conveniently be removed and the attaching officer 
does not act under the proviso to rule 43, he may, at the instance of the judgment-debtor or of the decree-
holder or of any other person claiming to be interested in such property, leave it in the village or place where 
it has been attached, in the custody of any respectable person (hereinafter referred to as the "custodian"). 
(2) If the custodian fails, after due notice, to produce such property at the place named by the Court before 
the officer deputed for the purpose or to restore it to the person in whose favour restoration is ordered by the 
Court, or if the property, though so produced or restored, is not in the same condition as it was when it was 
entrusted to him,— 
(a) the custodian shall be liable to pay compensation to the decree-holder, judgment-debtor or any other 
person who is found to be entitled to the restoration thereof, for any loss or damage cause by his default; and 
(b) such liability may be enforced— 
(i) at the instance of the decree-holder, as if the custodian were a surety under section 145; 
(ii) at the instance of the judgment-debtor or such other person, on an application in execution; and 
(c) any order determining such liability shall be appealable as a decree.] 
44 . Attachment of agricultural produce— Where the property to be attached is agricultural produce, the 
attachment shall be made by affixing a copy of the warrant of attachment,— 
(a) where such produce is a growing crop, on the land on which such crop has grown, or 
(b) where such produce has been cut or gathered, on the threshing floor or place for treading out grain or the 
like or fodder-stack on or in which it is deposited, 
and another copy on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part of the house in which the judgment-
debtor ordinarily resides or, with the leave of the Court, on the outer door or on some other conspicuous part 
of the house in which he carries on business or personally works for gain or in which he is known to have last 
resided or carried on business or personally worked for gain; and the produce shall thereupon be deemed to 
have passed into the possession of the Court. 
45 . Provisions as to agricultural produce under attachment— (1) Where agricultural produce is attached, the 
Court shall make such arrangements for the custody thereof as it may deem sufficient and, for the purpose of 
enabling the Court to make such arrangements, every application for the attachment of a growing crop shall 
specify the time at which it is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered. 
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the Court in this behalf either in the order of attachment 
or in any subsequent order, the judgment-debtor may tend, cut, gather and store the produce and do any 
other act necessary for maturing or preserving it; and if the judgment-debtor fails to do all or any of such 
acts, the decree-holder may, with the permission of the Court and subject to the like conditions, do all or any 
of them either by himself or by any person appointed by him in this behalf and the costs incurred by the 
decree-holder shall be recoverable from the judgment-debtor as if they were included in, or formed part of, 
the decree. 
(3) Agricultural produce attached as a growing crop shall not be deemed to have ceased to be under 
attachment or to require re-attachment merely because it has been severed from the soil. 
(4) Where an order for the attachment of a growing crop has been made at a considerable time before the 
crop is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered, the Court may suspend the execution of the order for such time 
as it thinks fit, and may, in its discretion, make a further order prohibiting the removal of the crop pending the 
execution of the order of attachment. 
(5) A growing crop which from its nature does not admit of being stored shall not be attached under the rule 
at any time less than twenty days before the time at which it is likely to be fit to be cut or gathered. 
46. Attachment of debt, share and other property not in possession of Judgment-debtor — (1) In the case 
of— 
(a) a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument, 
96

 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
(b) a share in the capital of a corporation, 
(c) other movable property not in the possession of the judgment- debtor, except property deposited in, or in 
the custody of, any Court, 
the attachment shall be made by a written order prohibiting,— 
(i) in the case of the debt, the credit or from recovering the debt and the debtor from making payment thereof 
until the further order of the Court; 
(ii) in the case of the share, the person in whose name the share may be standing from transferring the same 
or receiving any dividend thereon; 
(iii) in the case of the other movable property except as aforesaid, the person in possession of the same from 
giving it over to the judgment-debtor. 
(2) A copy of such order shall be affixed on some conspicuous part of the court-house, and another copy 
shall be sent in the case of the debt, to the debtor, in the case of the share, to the proper officer of the 
corporation and, in the case of the other movable property (except as aforesaid), to the person in possession 
of the same. 
(3) A debtor prohibited under clause (i) of sub-rule (1) may pay the amount of his debt into Court, and such 
payment shall discharge him as effectually as payment to the party entitled to receive the same. 
[268][46A . Notice to garnishee— (1) The Court may in the case of a debt (other than a debt secured by a 
mortgage or a charge) which has been attached under rule 46, upon the application of the attaching creditor, 
issue notice to the garnishee liable to pay such debt, calling upon him either to pay into Court the debt due 
from him to the judgment-debtor or so much thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the decree and costs of 
execution, or to appear and show cause why he should not do so. 
(2) An application under sub-rule (l) shall be made on affidavit verifying the facts alleged and stating that in 
the belief of the deponent, the garnishee is indebted to the judgment-debtor. 
(3) Where the garnishee pays in the Court the amount due from him to the judgment-debtor or so much 
thereof as is sufficient to satisfy the decree and the costs of the execution, the Court may direct that the 
amount may be paid to the decree-holder towards satisfaction of the decree and costs of the execution. 
46B . Order against garnishee— Where the garnishee does not forthwith pay into Court the amount due from 
him to the judgment-debtor or so much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy the decree and the costs of 
execution, and does not appear and show cause in answer to the notice, the Court may order the garnishee 
to comply with the terms of such notice, and on such order, execution may issue as though such order were 
a decree against him. 
46C . Trial of disputed questions— Where the garnishee disputes liability, the Court may order that any issue 
or question necessary for the determination of liability shall be tried as if it were an issue in a suit, and upon 
the determination of such issue shall make such order or orders as it deems fit: 
Provided that if the debt in respect of which the application under rule 46A is made is in respect of a sum of 
money beyond the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court, the Court shall send the execution case to the Court of 
the District Judge to which the said Court is subordinate, and thereupon the Court of the District Judge or 
any other competent Court to which it may be transferred by the District Judge shall deal with it in the same 
manner as if the case had been originally instituted in that Court. 
46D . Procedure where debt belongs to third person— Where it is suggested or appears to be probable that 
the debt belongs to some third person, or that any third person has a lien or charge on, or other interest in 
such debt, the Court may order such third person to appear and state the nature and particulars of his claim, 
if any, to such debt and prove the same. 
46E . Order as regards third person— After hearing such third person and any person or persons who any 
subsequently be ordered to appear, or where such third or other person or persons do not appear when so 
ordered, the Court may make such order as is hereinbefore provided, or such other order or orders upon 
such terms, if any, with respect to the lien, charge or interest, as the case may be, of such third or other 
person or persons as it may deem fit and proper. 
97

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46F . Payment by garnishee to be valid discharge— Payment made by the garnishee on notice under rule 
46A or under any such order as aforesaid shall be a valid discharge to him as against the judgment-debtor 
and any other person ordered to appear as aforesaid for the amount paid or levied, although the decree in 
execution of which the application under rule 46A was made, or the order passed in the proceedings on such 
application may be set aside or reversed. 
46G . Costs— The costs of any application made under rule 46A and of any proceeding arising therefrom or 
incidental thereto shall be in the discretion of the Court. 
46H . Appeals— An order made under rule 46B, rule 46C or rule 46E shall be appealable as a decree. 
46I . Application to negotiable instruments— The provisions of rule 46A to 46H (both inclusive) shall, so far 
as may be, apply in relation to negotiable instruments attached under rule 51 as they apply in relation to 
debts.] 
47 . Attachment of share in movables— Where the property to be attached consists of the share or interest 
of the judgment-debtor in movable property belonging to him and another as co-owners, the attachment shall 
be made by a notice to the judgment-debtor prohibiting him from transferring the share or interest or charging 
it in any way. 
48 . Attachment of salary or allowances of servant of the Government or railway company or local authority— 
(1) Where the property to be attached is the salary or allowances of a servant of the Government or of a 
servant of a railway company or local authority [269][or of a servant of a corporation engaged in any trade or 
industry which is established by a Central, Provincial or State Act, or a Government company as defined in 
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)] the Court, whether the judgment-debtor or the 
disbursing officer is or is not within the local limits of the Court's jurisdiction, may order that the amount shall, 
subject to the provisions of section 60, be withheld from such salary or allowances either in one payment or 
by monthly instalments as the Court may direct; and, upon notice of the order to such officer as the 
appropriate Government may be notification in the Official Gazette appoint in this behalf,— 
(a) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed within the local limits to which this Code for the time 
being extends, the officer or other person whose duty it is to disburse the same shall withhold and remits to 
the Court the amount due under the order, or the monthly instalments, as the case may be; 
(b) where such salary or allowances are to be disbursed beyond the said limits, the officer or other person 
within those limits whose duty it is to instruct the disbursing authority regarding the amount of the salary or 
allowances to the disbursed shall remit to the Court the amount due under the order, or the monthly 
instalments, as the case may be, and shall direct the disbursing authority to reduce the aggregate of the 
amounts from time to time, to be disbursed by the aggregate of the amounts from time to time remitted to the 
Courts. 
(2) Where the attachable proportion of such salary or allowances is already being withheld and remitted to a 
Court in pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied order of attachment, the officer appointed by the 
appropriate Government in this behalf shall forthwith return the subsequent order to the Court issuing it with 
a full statement of all the particulars of the existing attachment. 
[270] [(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is returned in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule 
(2) shall, without further notice or other process, bind the appropriate Government or the railway company or 
local authority or corporation or Government company, as the case may be, while the judgment-debtor is 
within the local limits to which this Code for the time being extends and while he is beyond those limits, if he 
is in receipt of any salary or allowances payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the consolidated 
Fund of the State or the funds of a railway company or local authority or corporation or Government 
Company in India; and the appropriate Government or the railway company or local authority or corporation 
or Government company, as the case may be, shall be liable for any sum paid in contravention of the rule.] 
[271] [Explanation.—In this rule, "appropriate Government" means,— 
(i) as respects any person in the service of the Central Government, or any servant of a railway 
administration or of a cantonment authority or of the port authority of a major port, or any servant of a 
corporation engaged in any trade or industry which is established by Central Act, or any servant of a 
Government company in which any part of the share capital is held by the Central Government or by more 
than one State Governments or partly by the Central Government and partly by one or more State 
Governments, the Central Government; 
98

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
(ii) as respects any other servant of the Government, or a servant of any other local or other authority, or any 
servant of a corporation engaged in any trade or industry which is established by a Provincial or State Act, or 
a servant of any other Government company, the State Government.] 
[272][48A . Attachment of salary or allowances of private employees— (1) Where the property to be attached 
is the salary or allowances of an employee other than an employee to whom rule 48 applies, the Court, 
where the disbursing officer of the employee is within the local limits of the Court's jurisdiction, may order that 
the amount shall, subject to the provisions of section 60, be withheld from such salary or allowances either in 
one payment or by monthly instalments as the Court may direct; and upon notice of the order to such 
disbursing officer, such disbursing officer shall remit to the Court the amount due under the order, or the 
monthly instalments, as the case may be. 
(2) Where the attachable portion of such salary or allowances is already being withheld or remitted to the 
Court in pursuance of a previous and unsatisfied order of attachment, the disbursing officer shall forthwith 
return the subsequent order to the Court issuing it with a full statement of all the particulars of the existing 
attachment. 
(3) Every order made under this rule, unless it is returned in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (2), 
shall, without further notice or other process, bind the employer while the judgment-debtors is within the local 
limits to which this Code for the time being extents and while he is beyond those-limits, if he is in receipt of 
salary or allowances payable out of the funds of an employer in any part of India; and the employer shall be 
liable for any sum paid in contravention of this rule.] 
49 . Attachment of partnership property— (1) Save as otherwise provided by this rule, property belonging to 
a partnership shall not be attached or sold in execution of a decree other than a decree passed against the 
firm or against the partners in the firm as such. 
(2) The Court may, on the application of the holder of a decree against a partner, make an order charging the 
interest of such partner in the partnership property, and profits with payment of the amount due under the 
decree, and may, by the same or a subsequent order, appoint a receiver of the share of such partner in the 
profits (whether already declared or accruing) and of any other money which may be coming to him in 
respect of the partnership, and direct accounts and inquiries and make an order for the sale of such interest 
or other orders as might have been directed or made if a charge had been made in favour of the degree-
holder by such partner, or as the circumstances of the case may require. 
(3) The other partner or partners shall be at liberty at any time to redeem the interest charged or, in the case 
of a sale being directed, to purchase the same. 
(4) Every application for an order under sub-rule (2) shall be served on the judgment-debtor and on his 
partners or such of them as are within India. 
(5) Every application made by any partner of the judgment-debtor under sub-rule (3) shall be served on the 
decree-holder and on the judgment-debtor, and on such of the other partners as do not join in the application 
and as are within India. 
(6) Service under sub-rule (4) or sub-rule (5) shall be deemed to be service on all the partners and all orders 
made on such application shall be similarly served. 
50 . Execution of decree against firm— (1) Where a decree has been passed against a firm, execution may 
be granted— 
(a) against any property of the partnership; 
(b) against any person who has appeared in his own name under rule 6 or rule 7 of Order XXX or who has 
admitted on the pleadings that he is, or who has been adjudged to be, a partner; 
(c) against any person who has been individually served as a partner with a summons and has failed to 
appear: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall be deemed to limit or otherwise affect the provisions of 
[273][section 30 of the Indial Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932)]. 
(2) Where the decree-holder claims to be entitled to cause the decree to be executed against any person 
other than such a person as is referred to in sub-rule (1), clauses (b) and (c), as being a partner in the firm 
99

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
he may apply to the Court which passed the decree for leave, and where the liability is not disputed, such 
court may grant such leave, or, where such liability is disputed, may order that the liability of such person be 
tried and determined in any manner in which any issue in a suit may be tried and determined. 
(3) Where the liability of any person has been tried and determined under sub-rule (2) the order made 
thereon shall have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it 
were a decree. 
(4) Save as against any property of the partnership, a decree against a firm shall not lease, render liable or 
otherwise affect any partner therein unless he has been served with a summons to appear and answer. 
[274] [(5) Nothing in this rule shall apply to a decree passed against a Hindu Undivided Family by virtue of 
the provision of rule 10 of Order XXX.] 
51 . Attachment of negotiable instruments— Where the property is a negotiable instrument not deposited in a 
Court, not in the custody of a public officer, the attachment shall be made by actual seizure, and the 
instrument shall be brought into Court and held subject to further orders of the Court. 
52 . Attachment of property in custody of Court or public officer— Where the property to be attached is in the 
custody of any Court or public officer, the attachment shall be made by a notice to such Court or officer, 
requesting that such property, and any interest or dividend becoming payable thereon, may be held subject 
to the further orders of the Court from which the notice is issued: 
Provided that, where such property is in the custody of a Court, any question of title or priority arising 
between the decree-holder and any other person, not being the judgment-debtor, claiming to be interested in 
such property by virtue of any assignment, attachment or otherwise, shall be determined by such Court. 
53 . Attachment of decrees— (1) Where the property to be attached is a decree, either for the payment of 
money or for sale in enforcement of a mortgage or charge, the attachment shall be made,— 
(a) if the decrees were passed by the same Court, then by order of such Court, and 
(b) if the decree sought to be attached was passed by another Court, then by the issue to such other Court of 
a notice by the Court which passed the decree sought to be executed, requesting such other Court to stay 
the execution of its decree unless and until— 
(i) the Court which passed the decree sought to be executed cancels the notice, or 
[275] [(ii) (a) the holder of the decree sought to be executed, or 
(b) his judgment-debtor with the previous consent in writing of such decree-holder, or with the permission of 
the attaching Court, 
applies to the Court receiving such notice to execute the attached decree.] 
(2) Where a Court makes an order under clause (a) of sub-rule (1), or receives an application under subhead 
(ii) of clause (b) of the said sub-rule, it shall, on the application of the creditor who has attached the decree or 
his judgment-debtor, proceeds to execute the attached decree and apply the net proceeds in satisfaction of 
the decree sought to be executed. 
(3) The holder of a decree sought to be executed by the attachment of another of decree the nature specified 
in sub-rule (1) shall be deemed to be the representative of the holder of the attached decree and to be 
entitled to executive such attached decree in any manner lawful for the holder thereof. 
(4) Where the property to be attached in the execution of a decree is a decree other than a decree of the 
nature referred to in sub-rule (1) the attachment shall be made by a notice by the Court which passed the 
decree sought to be executed, to the holder of the decree sought to be attached, prohibiting him from 
transferring or charging the same in any way; and, where such decree has been passed by any other Court, 
also by sending to such other Court a notice to abstain from executing the decree sought to be attached until 
such notice is cancelled by the Court from which it was sent. 
(5) The holder of a decree attached under this rule shall give the Court executing the decree such 
information and aid as may reasonably be required. 
100

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(6) On the application of the holder of a decree sought to be executed by the attachment of another decree, 
the Court making an order of attachment under this rule shall give notice of such order to the judgment-
debtor bound by the decree attached; and no payment or adjustment of the attached decree made by the 
judgment-debtor in contravention of such order [276][with knowledge thereof or] after receipt of notice 
thereof, either through the Court or otherwise, shall be recognized by any Court so long as the attachment 
remains in force. 
54 . Attachment of immovable property— (1) Where the property is immovable, the attachment shall be 
made by an order prohibiting the judgment-debtor from transferring or charging the property in any way, and 
all persons from taking any benefit from such transfer or charge. 
[277] [(1A) The order shall also require the judgment-debtor to attend Court on a specified date to take notice 
of the date to be fixed for settling the terms of the proclamation of sale.] 
(2) The order shall be proclaimed at some place on or adjacent to such property by beat of drum or other 
customary mode, and a copy of the order shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of the property and then 
upon a conspicuous part of the court-house, and also, where the property is land paying revenue to the 
Government in the office of the Collector of the district in which the land is situate [278][and, where the 
property is land situate in a village, also in the office of the Gram Panchayat, if any, having jurisdiction over 
that village.] 
55 . Removal of attachment after satisfaction of decree— Where— 
(a) the amount decreed with costs and all charges and expenses resulting from the attachment of any 
property are paid into Court, or 
(b) satisfaction of the decree is otherwise made through the Court or certified to the Court, or 
(c) the decree is set aside or reversed, 
the attachment shall be deemed to be withdrawn, and, in the case of immovable property, the withdrawal 
shall, if the judgment-debtor so desires, be proclaimed at his expense, and a copy of the proclamation shall 
be affixed in the manner prescribed by the last preceding rule. 
56 . Order for payment of coin or currency notes to party entitled under decree— Where the property 
attached is current coin or currency notes, the Court may, at any time during the continuance of the 
attachment, direct that such coin or notes, or a part thereof sufficient to satisfy the decree, be paid over to 
the party entitled under the decree to receive the same. 
[279][57 . Determination of attachment— (1) Where any property has been attached in execution of a decree 
and the Court, for any reason, passes an order dismissing the application for the execution of the decree, the 
Court shall direct whether the attachment shall continue or cease and shall also indicate the period up to 
which such attachment shall continue or the date on which such attachment shall cease. 
(2) If the Court omits to give such direction, the attachment shall be deemed to have ceased.] 
[280] [Adjudication of claims and objections 
58 . Adjudication of claims to, or objections to attachment of, property— (1) Where any claim is preferred to, 
or any objection is made to the attachment of, any property attached in execution of a decree on the ground 
that such property is not liable to such attachment, the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the claim or 
objection in accordance with the provisions herein contained: 
Provided that no such claim or objection shall be entertained— 
(a) where, before the claim is preferred or objection is made, the property attached has already been sold; or 
(b) where the Court considers that the claim or objection was designedly or unnecessarily delayed. 
(2) All questions (including questions relating to right, title or interest in the property attached) arising 
between the parties to a proceeding or their representatives under this rule and relevant to the adjudication 
of the claim or objection, shall be determined by the Court dealing with the claim or objection and not by a 
separate suit. 
101

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in sub- rule (2), the Court shall, in accordance with 
such determination,— 
(a) allow the claim or objection and release the property from attachment either wholly or to such extent as it 
thinks fit; or 
(b) disallow the claim or objection; or 
(c) continue the attachment subject to any mortgage, charge or other interest in favour of any person; or 
(d) pass such order as in the circumstances of the case it deems fit. 
(4) Where any claim or objection has been adjudicated upon under this rule, the order made thereon shall 
have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to appeal or otherwise as if it were a decree. 
(5) Where a claim or an objection is preferred and the Court, under the proviso to sub-rule (1), refuses to 
entertain it, the party against whom such order is made may institute a suit to establish the right which he 
claims to the property in dispute; but, subject to the result of such suit, if any, an order so refusing to 
entertain the claims or objection shall be conclusive. 
59 . Stay of sale— Where before the claim was preferred or the objection was made, the property attached 
had already been advertised for sale, the Court may— 
(a) if the property is movable, make an order postponing the sale pending the adjudication of the claim or 
objection, or 
(b) if the property is immovable, make an order that, pending the adjudication of the claim or objection, the 
property shall not be sold, or, that pending such adjudication, the property may be sold but the sale shall not 
be confirmed, 
and any such order may be made subject to such terms and conditions as to security or otherwise as the 
Court thinks fit.] 
60 to 63. [Omitted]. 
Sale genrally 
64 . Power to order property attached to be sold and proceeds to be paid to person entitled— Any Court 
executing a decree may order that any property attached by it and liable to sale, or such portion thereof as 
may see necessary to satisfy the decree, shall be sold, and that the proceeds of such sale, or a sufficient 
portion thereof, shall be paid to the party entitled under the decree to receive the same. 
65 . Sales by whom conducted and how made— Save as otherwise prescribed, every sale in execution of a 
decree shall be conducted by an officer of the Court or by such other person as the Court may appoint in this 
behalf, and shall be made by public auction in manner prescribed. 
66 . Proclamation of sales by public auction— (1) Where any property is ordered to be sold by public auction 
in execution of a decree, the Court shall cause a proclamation of the intended sale to be made in the 
language of such Court. 
(2) Such proclamation shall be draw up after notice to the decree-holder and the judgment-debtor and shall 
state the time and place of sale, and specify as fairly and accurately as possible— 
(a) the property to be sold [281][or, where a part of the property would be sufficient to satisfy the decree, 
such part]; 
(b) the revenue assessed upon the estate, where the property to be sold is an interest in an estate or in part 
of an estate paying revenue to the Government; 
(c) any incumbrance to which the property is liable; 
(d) the amount for the recovery of which the sale is ordered; and 
(e) every other thing which the Court considers material for a purchaser to know in order to judge of the 
nature and value of the property: 
102

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
[282] [Provided that where notice of the date for settling the terms of the proclamation has been given to the 
judgement-debtor by means of an order under rule 54, it shall not be necessary to give notice under this rule 
to the judgment-debtor unless the Court otherwise directs: 
Provided further that nothing in this rule shall be construed as requiring the Court to enter in the proclamation 
of sale its own estimate of the value of the property, but the proclamation shall include the estimate if any, 
given, by either or both of the parties.] 
(3) Every application for an order for sale under this rule shall be accompanied by a statement signed and 
verified in the manner hereinbefore prescribed for the signing and verification of pleadings and containing, so 
far as they are known to or can be ascertained by the person making the verification, the matters required by 
sub-rule (2) to be specified in the proclamation. 
(4) For the purpose of ascertaining the matters to be specified in the proclamation, the Court may summon 
any person whom it thinks necessary to summon and may examine him in respect to any such matters and 
require him to produce any document in his possession or power relating thereto. 
67 . Mode of making proclamation— (1) Every proclamation shall be made and published, as nearly as may 
be, in the manner prescribed by rule 54, sub-rule (2). 
(2) Where the Court so directs, such proclamation shall also be published in the Official Gazette or in a local 
newspaper, or in both, and the costs of such publication shall be deemed to be costs of the sale. 
(3) Where property is divided into lots for the purpose of being sold separately, it shall not be necessary to 
make a separate proclamation for each lot, unless proper notice of the sale cannot, in the opinion of the 
Court, otherwise be given. 
68 . Time of sale— Save in the case of property of the kind described in the proviso to rule 43, no sale 
hereunder shall, without the consent in writing of the judgment-debtor, take place until after the expiration of 
at least [283][fifteen days] in the case of immovable property, and of at least [284][seven days] in the case of 
movable property, calculated from the date on which the copy of the proclamation has been affixed on the 
court-house of the Judge ordering the sale. 
69 . Adjournment or stoppage of sale— (1) The Court may, in its discretion, adjourn any sale hereunder to a 
specified day and hour, and the officer conducting any such sale may in his discretion adjourn the sale, 
recording his reasons for such adjournment: 
Provided that, where the sale is made in, or within the precincts of, the court-house, no such adjournment 
shall be made without the leave of the Court. 
(2) Where a sale is adjourned under sub-rule (1) or a longer period than [285][thirty] days a fresh 
proclamation under rule 67 shall be made, unless the judgment-debtor consents to waive it. 
(3) Every sale be stopped if, before the lot is knocked down, the debt and costs (including the costs of the 
sale) are tendered to the officer conducting the sale, or proof is given to his satisfaction that the amount of 
such debt and costs has been paid into the Court which ordered the sale. 
70 . [Saving of certain sales.] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1956 (66 of 1956), s. 
14. 
71 . Defaulting purchaser answerable for loss on re-sale— Any deficiency of price which may happen on a 
re-sale by reason of the purchaser's default, and all expenses attending such re-sale, shall be certified to the 
Court by the officer or other person holding the sale, and shall, at the instance of either the decree-holder or 
the judgment-debtor, be recoverable from the defaulting purchaser under the provisions relating to the 
execution of a decree for the payment of money. 
72 . Decree holder not to bid for or buy property without permission— (1) No holder of a decree in execution 
of which property is sold shall, without the express permission of the Court, bid for or purchase the property. 
(2) Where decree-holder purchases, amount of decree may be taken as payment—Where a decree-holder 
purchases with such permission, the purchase-money and the amount due on the decree may, subject to the 
provisions of section 73, be set off against one another, and the Court executing the decree small enter up 
satisfaction of the decree in whole or in part accordingly. 
103

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(3) Where a decree-holder purchases, by himself or through another person, without such permission, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit, on the application of the judgment-debtor or any other person whose interests are 
affected by the sale, by order set aside the sale; and the costs of such application and order, and any 
deficiency of price which may happen on the re-sale and all expenses attending it, shall be paid by the 
decree-holder. 
[286][72A . Mortgagee not to bid at sale without the leave of the Court— (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in rule 72, a mortgagee of immovable property shall not bid for or purchase property sold in 
execution of a decree on the mortgage unless the Court grants him leave to bid for or purchase the property. 
(2) If leave to bid is granted to such mortgagee, then the Court shall fix a reserve price as regards the 
mortgagee, and unless the Court otherwise directs, the reserve price shall be— 
(a) not less than the amount then due for principal, interest and costs in respect of the mortgage if the 
property is sold in one lot; and 
(b) in the case of any property sold in lots, not less than such sum as shall appear to the Court to be properly 
attributable to each lot in relation to the amount then due for principal, interest and costs on the mortgage. 
(3) In other respects, the provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) of rule 72 shall apply in relation to purchase by 
the decree-holder under that rule.] 
73 . Restriction on bidding or purchase by officers— No officer or other person having any duty to perform in 
connection with any sale shall, either directly or indirectly, bid for, acquire or attempt to acquire any interest 
in the property sold. 
Sale of movable property 
74 . Sale of agricultural produce— (1) Where the property to be sold is agricultural produce, the sale shall be 
held,— 
(a) if such produce is a growing crop, on or near the land on which such crop has grown, or 
(b) if such produce has been cut or gathered, at or near the threshing floor or place for treading out grain or 
the like or fodder-stack on or in which it is deposited: 
Provided that the Court may direct the sale to be held at the nearest place of public resort, if it is of opinion 
that the produce is thereby likely to sell to greater advantage. 
(2) Where, on the produce being put up for sale,— 
(a) a fair price, in the estimation of the person holding the sale, is not offered for it, and 
(b) the owner of the produce or a person authorized to act in his behalf applies to have the sale postponed till 
next day or, if a market is held at the place of sale, the next market-day, 
the sale shall be postponed accordingly and shall be then completed, whatever price may be offered for the 
produce. 
75 . Special provisions relating to growing crops— (1) Where the property to be sold is a growing crop and 
the crop from its nature admits of being stored but has not yet been stored, the day of the sale shall be so 
fixed as to admit of its being made ready for storing before the arrival of such day, and the sale shall not be 
held until the crop has been cut or gathered and is ready for storing. 
(2) Where the crop from its nature does not admit of being stored, it may be sold before it is cut and gathered 
and the purchaser shall be entitled to enter on the land, and to do all that is necessary for the purpose of 
tending and cutting or gathering it. 
76 . Negotiable instruments and shares in corporations— Where the property to be sold is a negotiable 
instrument or a share in a corporation, the Court may, instead of directing the sale to be made by public 
auction, authorize the sale of such instrument or share through a broker. 
77 . Sale by public auction— (1) Where movable property is sold by public auction the price of each lot shall 
be paid at the time of sale or as soon after as the officer or other person holding the sale directs, and in 
default of payment the property shall forthwith be re-sold. 
104

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) On payment of the purchase-money, the officer or other person holding the sale shall grant a receipt for 
the same, and the sale shall become absolute. 
(3) Where the movable property to be sold is a share in goods belonging to the judgment-debtor and a co­
owner, and two or more persons, of whom one is such co-owner, respectively bid the same sum for such 
property or for any lot, the bidding shall be deemed to be the bidding of the co-owner. 
78 . Irregularity not to vitiate sale, but any person injured may sue— No irregularity in publishing or 
conducting the sale of movable property shall vitiate the sale; but any person sustaining any injury by reason 
of such irregularity at the hand of any other person may institute a suit against him for compensation or (if 
such other person is the purchaser) for the recovery of the specific property and for compensation in default 
of such recovery. 
79 . Delivery of movable property, debts and shares— (1) Where the property sold is movable property of 
which actual seizure has been made, it shall be delivered to the purchaser. 
(2) Where the property sold is movable property in the possession of some person other than the judgment-
debtor, the delivery thereof to the purchaser shall be made by giving notice to the person in possession 
prohibiting him from delivering possession of the property to any person except the purchaser. 
(3) Where the property sold is a debt not secured by a negotiable instrument, or is a share in a corporation, 
the delivery thereof shall be made by a written order of the Court prohibiting the creditor from receiving the 
debt or any interest thereon, and the debtor from making payment thereof to any person except the 
purchaser, of prohibiting the person in whose name the share may be standing from making any transfer of 
the share to any person except the purchaser, or receiving payment of any dividend or interest thereon, and 
the manager, secretary or other proper officer of the corporation from permitting any such transfer or making 
any such payment to any person except the purchaser. 
80 . Transfer of negotiable instruments and shares— (1) Where the execution of a document or the 
endorsement of the party in whose name a negotiable instrument or a share in a corporation is standing is 
required to transfer such negotiable instrument or share, the Judge or such officer as he may appoint in this 
behalf may execute such document or make such endorsement as may be necessary, and such execution or 
endorsement shall have the same effect as an execution or endorsement by the party. 
(2) Such execution or endorsement may be in the following form, namely:— 
A.B. by C.D. Judge of the Court of (or as the case may be), in a suit by E.F. against A.B. 
(3) Until the transfer of such negotiable instrument or share, the Court may, by order appoint some person to 
receive any interest or dividend due thereon and to sign a receipt for the same; and any receipt so signed 
shall be as valid and effectual for all purposes as if the same had been signed by the party himself. 
81 . Vesting order in case of other property— In the case of any movable property not hereinbefore provided 
for, the Court may make an order vesting such property in the purchaser or as he may direct; and such 
property shall vest accordingly. 
Sale of immovable property 
82 . What Courts may order sales— Sales of immovable property in execution of decrees may be ordered by 
any Court other than a Court of Small Causes. 
83 . Postponement of sale to enable judgment-debtor to raise amount of decree— (1)Where an order for the 
sale of immovable property has been made, if the judgment-debtor can satisfy the Court that there is reason 
to believe that the amount of the decree may be raised by the mortgage or lease or private sale of such 
property, or some part thereof, or of any other immovable property of the judgment-debtor, the Court may, on 
his application, postpone the sale of the property comprised in the order for sale on such terms and for such 
period as it thinks proper, to enable him to raise the amount. 
(2) In such case the Court shall grant a certificate to the judgment-debtor authorizing him within a period to 
be mentioned therein, and notwithstanding anything contained in section 64, to make the proposed 
mortgage, lease or sale: 
105

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided that all moneys payable under such mortgage, lease or sale shall be paid, not to the judgment-
debtor, but, save in so far as a decree-holder is entitled to set-off such money under the provisions of rule 
72, into Court: 
Provided also that not mortgage, lease or sale under this rule shall become absolute until it has been 
confirmed by the Court. 
(3) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to apply to a sale of property directed to be sold in execution of a 
decree for sale in enforcement of a mortgage of, or charge on, such property. 
84 . Deposit by purchaser and re-sale on default— (1) On every sale of immovable property the person 
declared to be the purchaser shall pay immediately after such declaration a deposit of twenty-five per cent, 
on the amount of his purchase-money to the officer or other person conducting the sale, and in default of 
such deposit, the property shall forthwith be re-sold. 
(2) Where the decree-holder is the purchaser and is entitled to set-off the purchase-money under rule 72, the 
Court may dispense with the requirements of this rule. 
85 . Time for payment in full of purchase-money— The full amount of purchase-money payable shall be paid 
by the purchaser into Court before the Court closes on the fifteenth day from the sale of the property: 
Provided, that, in calculating the amount to be so paid into Court, the purchaser shall have the advantage of 
any set-off to which he may be entitled under rule 72. 
86 . Procedure in default of payment— In default of payment within the period mentioned in the last 
preceding rule, the deposit may, if the Court thinks fit, after defraying the expenses of the sale, be forfeited to 
the Government, and the property shall be re-sold, and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit all claim to the 
property our to any part of the sum for which it may subsequently be sold. 
87 . Notification on re-sale— Every re-sale of immovable, property, in default of payment of the purchase-
money within the period allowed for such payment, shall be made after the issue of fresh proclamation in the 
manner and for the period hereinbefore prescribed for the sale. 
88 . Bid of co-sharer to have preference— Where the property sold is a share of undivided immovable 
property and two or more persons, or whom one is a co-sharer, respectively bid the same sum for such 
property or for any lot, the bid shall be deemed to be the bid of the co-sharer. 
89 . Application to set aside sale on deposit— (1) Where immovable property has been sold in execution of a 
degree, [287][any person claiming an interest in the property sold at the time of the sale or at the time of 
making the application, or acting for or in the interest of such person,] may apply to have the sale set aside 
on his deposition in Court,— 
(a) for payment to the purchaser, a sum equal to five per cent of the purchase-money, and 
(b) for payment, to the decree-holder, the amount specified in the proclamation of sale as that for the 
recovery of which the sale was ordered less any amount which may, since the date of such proclamation of 
sale, have been received by the decree- holder. 
(2) Where a person applies under rule 90 to set aside the sale of his immovable property, he shall not unless 
he withdraws his application, be entitled to make or prosecute an application under this rule. 
(3) Nothing in this rule shall relieve the judgment-debtor from any liability he may be under in respect of costs 
and interest not covered by the proclamation of sale. 
[288][90 . Application to set aside sale on ground of irregularity or fraud— (1) Where any immovable property 
has been sold in execution of a decree, the decree-holder, or the purchaser, or any other person entitled to 
share in a rateable distribution of assets, whose interests are affected by the sale, may apply to the Court to 
set aside the sale on the ground of a material irregularity or fraud in publishing or conduction it. 
(2) No sale shall be set aside on the ground of irregularity or fraud in publishing or conducting it unless, upon 
the facts proved, the Court is satisfied that the applicant has sustained substantial injury by reason of such 
irregularity or fraud. 
(3) No application to set aside a sale under this rule shall be entertained upon any ground which the 
applicant could have taken on or before the date on which the proclamation of sale was drawn up. 
106

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Explanation.—There mere absence of, or defect in, attachment of the property sold shall not, by itself, be a 
ground for setting aside a sale under this rule.] 
91 . Application by purchaser to set aside sale on ground of judgment-debtor having no saleable interest— 
The purchaser at any such sale in execution of a decree may apply to the Court to set aside the sale, on the 
ground that the judgment-debtor had no saleable interest in the property sold. 
92 . Sale when to become absolute or be set aside— (1) When no application is made under rule 89, rule 90 
or rule 91, or where such application is made and disallowed, the Court shall make an order confirming the 
sale, and thereupon the sale shall become absolute: 
[289][Provided that, where any property is sold in execution of a decree pending the final disposal of any 
claim to, or any objection to the attachment of, such property, the Court shall not confirm such sale until the 
final disposal of such claim or objection.] 
(2) Where such application is made and allowed, and where, in the case of an application under rule 89, the 
deposit required by that rule is made within thirty days from the date of sale, [290][or in cases where the 
amount deposited under rule 89 is found to be deficient owing to any clerical or arithmetical mistake on the 
part of the depositor and such deficiency has been made good within such time as may be fixed by the 
Court, the Court shall make an order setting aside the sale]: 
Provided that no order shall be made unless notice of the application has been given to all persons affected 
thereby. 
(3) No suit to set aside an order made under this rule shall be brought by any person against whom such 
order is made. 
[291] [(4) Where a third party challenges the judgment-debtor's title by filing a suit against the auction-
purchaser, the decree-holder and the judgment-debtor shall be necessary parties to the suit. 
(5) If the suit referred to in sub-rule (4) is decreed, the Court shall direct the decree-holder to refund the 
money to the auction-purchaser, and where such an order is passed the execution proceeding in which the 
sale had been held shall, unless the Court directs, be revived at the stage at which the sale was ordered.] 
93 . Return of purchase-money in certain cases— Where a sale of immovable property is set aside under 
rule 92, the purchaser shall be entitled to an order for repayment of his purchase-money, with or without 
interest as the Court may direct, against any person to whom it has been paid. 
94 . Certificate to purchaser— Where a sale of immovable property has become absolute, the Court shall 
grant a certificate specifying the property sold and the name of the person who at the time of sale of is 
declared to be the purchaser. Such certificate shall bear date the day on which the sale became absolute. 
95 . Delivery of property in occupancy of judgment- debtor— Where the immovable property sold is in the 
occupancy of the judgment-debtor or of some person on his behalf or of some person claiming under a title 
created by the judgment-debtor subsequently to the attachment of such property and a certificate in respect 
thereof has been granted under rule 94, the Court shall, on the application of the purchaser, order to delivery 
to be made by putting such purchaser or any person whom he may appoint to receive delivery on his behalf 
in possession of the property, and, if need be, by removing any person who refuses to vacate the same. 
96 . Delivery of property in occupancy of tenant— Where the property sold is in the occupancy of a tenant or 
other person entitled to occupy the same and a certificate in respect thereof has been granted under rule 94, 
the Court shall, on the application of the purchaser, order delivery to be made by affixing a copy of the 
certificate of sale in some conspicuous place on the property, and proclaiming to the occupant by beat of 
drum or other customary mode, at some convenient place, that the interest of the judgment-debtor has been 
transferred to the purchaser. 
Resistance to delivery of possession to decree- holder or purchaser 
97 . Resistance or obstruction to possession of immovable property— (1) Where the holder of a decree for 
the possession of immovable property or the purchaser of any such property sold in execution of a decree is 
resisted or obstructed by any person in obtaining possession of the property, he may make an application to 
the Court complaining of such resistance or obstruction. 
107

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[292][(2) Where any application is made under sub-rule (1), the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the 
application in accordance with the provisions herein contained.] 
[293] [98 . Orders after adjudication— (1) Upon the determination of the questions referred to in rule 101, the 
Court shall, in accordance with such determination and subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2),— 
(a) make an order allowing the application and directing that the applicant be put into the possession of the 
property or dismissing the application; or 
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstances of the case, it may deem fit. 
(2) Where, upon such determination, the Court is satisfied that the resistance or obstruction was occasioned 
without any just cause by the judgment-debtor or by some other person at his instigation or on his behalf, or 
by any transferee, where such transfer was made during the pendency of the suit or execution proceeding, it 
shall direct that the applicant be put into possession of the property, and where the applicant is still resisted 
or obstructed in obtaining possession, the Court may also, at the instance of the applicant, order the 
judgment-debtor, or any person acting at his instigation or on his behalf, to be detained in the civil prison for 
a term which may extend to thirty days. 
99 . Dispossession by decree-holder or purchaser— (1) Where any person other than the judgment-debtor is 
dispossessed of immovable property by the holder of a decree for possession of such property or, where 
such property has been sold in execution of a decree, by the purchaser thereof, he may make an application 
to the Court complaining of such dispossession. 
(2) Where any such application is made, the Court shall proceed to adjudicate upon the application in 
accordance with the provisions herein contained. 
100 . Order to be passed upon application complaining of dispossession— Upon the determination of the 
questions referred to in rule 101, the Court shall, in accordance with such determination,— 
(a) make an order allowing the application and directing that the applicant be put into the possession of the 
property or dismissing the application; or 
(b) pass such other order as, in the circumstances of the case, it may deem fit. 
101 . Question to be determined— All questions (including questions relating to right, title or interest in the 
property) arising between the parties to a proceeding on an application under rule 97 or rule 99 or their 
representatives, and relevant to the adjudication of the application, shall be determined by the Court dealing 
with the application and not by a separate suit and for this purpose, the Court shall, notwithstanding anything 
to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, be deemed to have jurisdiction to 
decide such questions. 
102 . Rules not applicable to transferee BIpendent lite— Nothing in rules 98 and 100 shall apply to 
resistance or obstruction in execution of a decree for the possession of immovable property by a person to 
whom the judgment-debtor has transferred the property after the institution of the suit in which the decree 
was passed or to the dispossession of any such person. 
Explanation—In this rule, "transfer" includes a transfer by operation of law. 
103 . Orders to be treated as decrees— Where any application has been adjudicated upon under rule 98 or 
rule 100 the other made thereon shall have the same force and be subject to the same conditions as to an 
appeal or otherwise as if it were a decree.] 
[294][104 . Order under rule 101 or rule 103 to be subject to the result or pending suit— Every order made 
under rule 101 or rule 103 shall be subject to the result of any suit that may be pending on the date of 
commencement of the proceeding in which such order is made, if in such suit the party against whom the 
order under rule 101 or rule 103 is made has sought to establish a right which he claims to the present 
possession of the property. 
105 . Hearing of application— (1) The Court, before which an application under any of the foregoing rules of 
this Order is pending, may fix a day for the hearing of the application. 
(2) Where on the day fixed or on any other day to which the hearing may be adjourned the applicant does 
not appear when the case is called on for hearing, the Court may make an order that the application be 
dismissed. 
108

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
(3) Where the applicant appears and the opposite party to whom the notice has been issued by the Court 
does not appear, the Court may hear the application ex parte and pass such order as it thinks fit. 
Explanation.—An application referred to in sub-rule (1) includes a claim or objection made under rule 58. 
106 . Setting aside order passed BIex parte, etc.— (1) The applicant, against whom an order is made under 
sub-rule (2) rule 105 or the opposite party against whom an order is passed ex parte under sub-rule (3) of 
that rule or under sub-rule (1) of rule 23, may apply to the Court to set aside the order, and if he satisfies the 
Court that there was sufficient cause for his non- appearance when the application was called on for hearing, 
the Court shall set aside the order or such terms as to costs, or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a 
day for the further hearing of the application. 
(2) No order shall be made on an application under sub-rule (1) unless notice of the application has been 
served on the other party. 
(3) An application under sub-rule (1) shall be made within thirty days from the date of the order, or where, in 
the case of an ex parte order, the notice was not duly served, within thirty days from the date when applicant 
had knowledge of the order.] 
ORDER XXII- DEATH, MARRIAGE AND INSOLVENCY OR PARTIES 
1 . No abatement by party's death if right to sue survives— The death of a plaintiff or defendant shall not 
cause the suit to abate if the right to sue survives. 
2 . Procedure where one of several plaintiffs or defendants dies and right to sue survives— Where there are 
more plaintiffs or defendants than one, and any of them dies, and where the right to sue survives to the 
surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or against the surviving defendant or defendants alone, the Court shall 
cause an entry to the effect to be made on the record, and the suit shall proceed at the instance of the 
surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs, or against the surving defendant or defendants. 
3 . Procedure in case of death of one of several plaintiffs or of sole plaintiff— (1) Where one of two or more 
plaintiffs dies and the right to sue does not survive to the surviving plaintiff or plaintiffs alone, or a sole 
plaintiff or sole surviving plaintiff dies and the right to the sue survives, the Court, on an application made in 
that behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the deceased plaintiff to be made a party and shall 
proceed with the suit. 
(2) Where within the time limited by law no application is made under sub-rule (1), the suit shall abate so far 
as the deceased plaintiff is concerned, and, on the application of the defendant, the Court may award to him 
the costs which he may have incurred in defending the suit, to be recovered from the estate of the deceased 
plaintiff. 
4 . Procedure in case of death of one of several defendants or of sole defendant— (1) Where one of two or 
more defendants dies and the right to sue does not survive against the surviving defendant or defendants 
alone, or a sole defendant or sole surviving defendant dies and the right to sue survives, the Court, on an 
application made in that behalf, shall cause the legal representative of the deceased defendant to be made a 
party and shall proceed with the suit. 
(2) Any person so made a party may make any defence appropriate to his character as legal representative 
of the deceased defendant. 
(3) Where within the time limited by law no application is made under sub-rule (1), the suit shall abate as 
against the deceased defendant. 
[295] [(4) The Court whenever it thinks fit, may exempt the plaintiff from the necessity of substituting the legal 
representatives of any such defendant who has failed to file a written statement or who, having filed it, has 
failed to appear and contest the suit at the hearing; and judgment may, in such case, be pronounced against 
the said defendant not withstanding the death of such defendant and shall have the same force and effect as 
if it has been pronounced before death took place. 
(5) Where— 
(a) the plaintiff was ignorant of the death of a defendant, and could not, for that reason, make an application 
for the substitution of the legal representative of the defendant under this rule within the period specified in 
the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) and the suit has, in consequence, abated, and 
109

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) the plaintiff applies after the expiry of the period specified therefor in the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), 
for setting aside the abatement and also for the admission of that application under section 5 of that Act on 
the ground that he had, by reason of such ignorance, sufficient cause for not making the application within 
the period specified in the said Act, 
the Court shall, in considering the application under the said section 5, have due regard to the fact of such 
ignorance, if proved.] 
[296][4A . Procedure where there is no legal representative— (1) If, in any suit, it shall appear to the Court 
that any party who has died during the pendency of the suit has no legal representative, the Court may, on 
the application of any party to the suit, proceed in the absence of a person representing the estate of the 
deceased person, or may by order appoint the Administrator-General, or an officer of the Court or such other 
person as it thinks fit to represent the estate of the deceased person for the purpose of the suit; and any 
judgment or order subsequently given or made in the suit shall bind the estate of the deceased person to the 
same extent as he would have been bound if a personal representative of the deceased person had been a 
party to the suit. 
(2) Before making an order under this rule, the Court— 
(a) may require notice of the application for the order to be given to such (if any) of the persons having an 
interest in the estate of the deceased person as it thinks fit; and 
(b) shall ascertain that the person proposed to be appointed to represent the estate of the deceased person 
is willing to be so appointed and has no interest adverse to that of the deceased person.] 
5 . Determination of question as to legal representative— Where a question arises as to whether any person 
is or is not the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or a deceased defendant, such question shall be 
determined by the Court: 
[297][Provided that where such question arises before an Appellate Court, that Court may, before 
determining the question, direct any subordinate Court to try the question and to return the records together 
with evidence, if any, recorded at such trial, its findings and reasons therefor, and the Appellate Court may 
take the same into consideration in determining the question.] 
6 . No abatement by reason of death after hearing— Nothwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
rules, whether the cause of action survives or not, there shall be no abatement by reason of the death of 
either party between the conclusion of the hearing and the pronouncing of the judgment, but judgment may 
in such case be pronounced notwithstanding the death and shall have the same force and effect as if it had 
been pronounced before the death took place. 
7 . Suit not abated by marriage of female party— (1) The marriage of a female plaintiff or defendant shall not 
cause the suit to abate, but the suit may notwithstanding be proceeded with to judgment, and, where the 
decree is against a female defendant, it may be executed against her alone. 
(2) Where the husband is by law liable for the debts of his wife, the decree may, with the permission of the 
Court, be executed against the husband also; and in case of judgment for the wife, execution of the decree 
may, with such permission, be issued upon the application of the husband, where the husband is by law 
entitled to the subject matter of the decree. 
8 . When plaintiffs insolvency bars suit— (1) The insolvency of a plaintiff in any suit which the assignee or 
receiver might maintain for the benefit of his creditors, shall not cause the suit to abate, unless such 
assignee or receiver declines to continue the suit or (unless for any special reason the Court otherwise 
directs) to give security for the costs thereof within such time as the Court may direct. 
(2) Procedure where assignee fails to continue suit, or give security—Where the assignee or receiver 
neglects or refuses to continue the suit and to give such security within the time so ordered, the defendant 
may apply for the dismissal of the suit on the ground of the plaintiff's insolvency, and the Court may make an 
order dismissing the suit and awarding to the defendant the costs which he has insured in defending the 
same to be proved as a debt against the plaintiff's estate. 
9 . Effect of abatement or dismissal— (1) Where a suit abates or is dismissed under this Order, no fresh suit 
shall be brought on the same cause of action. 
110

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) The plaintiff or the person claiming to be the legal representative of a deceased plaintiff or the assignee 
or the receiver in the case of an insolvent plaintiff may apply for an order to set aside the abatement or 
dismissal; and if it is proved that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from continuing the suit, the Court 
shall set aside the abatement or dismissal upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit. 
(3) The provisions of section 5 of the [298][Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877)] shall apply to 
applications under sub-rule (2). 
[299][Explanation—Nothing in this rule shall be construed as barring, in any later suit, a defence based on 
the facts which constituted the cause of action in the suit which had abated or had been dismissed under this 
Order] 
10 . Procedure in case of assignment before final order in suit— (1) In other cases of an assignment, 
creation or devolution of any interest during the pendency of a suit, may, by leave of the Court, be continued 
by or against the person to or upon whom such interest has come or devolved. 
(2) The attachment of a decree pending an appeal therefrom shall be deemed to be an interest entitling the 
person who procured such attachment to the benefit of sub-rule (1). 
[300][10A . Duty or pleader to communicate to Court death of a party— Wherever a pleader appearing for a 
party to the suit comes to know of the death of that party, he shall inform the Court about it, and the Court 
shall there upon give notice of such death to the other party, and, for this purpose, the contract between the 
pleader and the deceased party shall be deemed to subsist.] 
11 . Application of Order to appeals— In the application of this Order to appeals, so far as may be, the word 
"plaintiff" shall be held to include an appellant, the word "defendant" a respondent, and the word "suit" an 
appeal. 
12 . Application of Order to proceedings— Nothing in rules 3, 4 and 8 shall apply to proceedings in executive 
of a decree or order. 
ORDER XXIII- WITHDRAWAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF SUITS 
[301][1 . Withdrawal of suit or abandonment of part of claim— (1) At any time after the institution of a suit, the 
plaintiff may as against all or any of the defendants abandon his suit or abandon a part of his claim: 
Provided that where the plaintiff is a minor or other person to whom the provisions contained in rules 1 to 14 
of Order XXXII extend, neither the suit nor any part of the claim shall be abandoned without the leave of the 
Court. 
(2) An application for leave under the proviso to sub-rule (1) shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the next 
friend and also, if the minor or such other person is represented by a pleader, by a certificate of the pleader 
to the effect that the abandonment proposed is, in his opinion, for the benefit of the minor or such other 
persons. 
(3) Where the Court is satisfied,— 
(a) that a suit must fail by reason of some formal defect, or 
(b) that there are sufficient grounds for allowing the plaintiff to institute a fresh suit for the subject-matter of a 
suit or part of a claim, 
it may, on such terms as it thinks fit, grant the plaintiff permission to withdraw from such suit or such part of 
the claim with liberty to institute a fresh suit in respect of the subject- matter of such suit or such part of the 
claim. 
(4) Where the plaintiff— 
(a) abandons any suit or part of claim under sub-rule (1), or 
(b) withdraws from a suit or part of a claim without the permission referred to in sub-rule (3), 
he shall be liable for such costs as the Court may award and shall be preclude from instituting any fresh suit 
in respect of such subject-matter or such part of the claim. 
111

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to authorise the Court to permit one of several plaintiffs to abandon a 
suit or part of a claim under sub-rule (1), or to withdraw, under sub-rule (3), any suit or part of a claim, 
without the consent of the other plaintiffs.] 
[302][1A . When transposition of defendants as plaintiffs may be permitted— Where a suit is withdrawn or 
abandoned by a plaintiff under rule 1, and a defendant applies to be transposed as a plaintiff under rule 10 of 
Order I the Court shall, in considering such application, have due regard to the question whether the 
applicant has a substantial question to be decided as against any of the other defendants.] 
2 . Limitation law not affected by first suit— In any fresh suit instituted on permission granted under the last 
preceding rule, the plaintiff shall be bound by the law of limitation in the same manner as if the first suit had 
not been instituted. 
3 . Compromise of suit— Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that a suit has been adjusted 
wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or compromise [303][in writing and signed by the parties] or where 
the defendant satisfied the plaintiff in respect of the whole or any part of the subject-matter of the suit, the 
Court shall order such agreement, compromise satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a decree is 
accordance therewith [304][so far as it relates to the parties to the suit, whether or not the subject-matter of 
the agreement, compromise or satisfaction is the same as the subject-matter of the suit:] 
[305] [Provided that where it is alleged by one party and denied by the other that an adjustment or 
satisfaction has been arrived at, the Court shall decide the question; but not adjournment shall be granted for 
the purpose of deciding the question, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, thinks fit to grant such 
adjournment.] 
[306] [Explanation—An agreement or compromise which is void or voidable under the Indian Contract Act, 
1872 (9 of 1872), shall not be deemed to be lawful within the meaning of this rule;] 
[307][3A . Bar to suit— No suit shall lie to set aside a decree on the ground that the compromise on which 
the decree is based was not lawful. 
3B . No agreement or compromise to be entered in a representative suit without leave of Court— (1) no 
agreement or compromise in a representative suit shall be entered into without the leave of the Court 
expressly recorded in the proceedings; and any such agreement or compromise entered into without the 
leave of the Court so recorded shall be void. 
(2) Before granting such leave, the Court shall give notice in such manner as it may think fit to such persons 
as may appear to it to be interested in the suit. 
Explanation.—In this rule, "representative suit" means,— 
(a) a suit under section 91 or section 92, 
(b) a suit under rule 8 of Order I, 
(c) a suit in which the manager of an undivided Hindu family sues or is sued as representing the other 
members of the family, 
(d) any other suit in which the decree passed may, by virtue of the provisions of this Code or of any other law 
for the time being in force, bind any person who is not named as party to the suit.] 
4 . Proceeding in execution of decrees not affected— Nothing in this Order shall apply to any proceedings in 
execution of a decree or order. 
ORDER XXIV- PAYMENT INTO COURT 
1 . Deposit by defendant of amount in satisfaction of claim— The defendant in any suit to recover a debt or 
damage may, at any stage of the suit, deposit in Court such sum of money as he considers a satisfaction in 
full of the claim. 
2 . Notice of deposit— Notice of the deposit shall be given through the Court by the defendant to the plaintiff, 
and the amount of the deposit shall (unless the Court otherwise directs) be paid to the plaintiff on his 
application. 
112

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 . Interest on deposit not allowed to plaintiff after notice— No interest shall be allowed to the plaintiff on any 
sum deposited by the defendant from the date of the receipt of such notice, whether the sum deposited is in 
full of the claim or falls short thereof. 
4 . Procedure where plaintiff accepts deposit as satisfaction in part— (1) Where the plaintiff accepts such 
amount as satisfaction in part only of his claim he may prosecute suit for the balance; and, if the Court 
decides that the deposit by the defendant was a full satisfaction of the plaintiff's claim, the plaintiff shall pay 
the costs of the suit incurred after the deposit and the costs incurred previous thereto, so far as they were 
caused by excess in the plaintiff's claim. 
(2) Procedure where he accepts it as satisfaction in full—Where the plaintiff accepts such amount as 
satisfaction in full of his claim he shall present to the Court a statement to that effect, and such statement 
shall be filed and the Court shall pronounce judgment accordingly; and, in directing by whom the costs of 
each party are to be paid, the Court shall consider which of the parties is most to blame for the litigation. 
Illustrations 
(a) A owes B Rs. 100. B sues A for the amount, having made no demand for payment, and having no reason 
to believe that the delay caused by making a demand would place him at a disadvantage. On the plaint being 
filed. A pays the money into Court, B accepts it in full satisfaction of his claim, but the Court should not allow 
him any costs, the litigation being presumably groundless on his part. 
(b) B sues A under the circumstance mentioned in illustration (a). On the plaint being filed, A disputes the 
claim. Afterwards A pays the money into Court. B accepts it in full satisfaction of his claim. The Court should 
also give B his cast of suit. A's conduct having shown that the litigation was necessary. 
(c) A owes B Rs. 100, and is willing to pay him that sum without suit. B claims Rs. 150 and sues A for that 
amount. On the plaint being filed, A pays Rs. 100 into Court and disputes only his liability to pay the 
remaining Rs. 50. B accepts the Rs. 100 in full satisfaction of his claim. The Court should order him to pay 
A's costs. 
ORDER XXV-SECURITY FOR COSTS 
1 . When security for costs may be required from plaintiff— (1) At any stage of a suit, the Court may, either of 
its own motion or on the application of any defendant, order the plaintiff, for reasons to be recorded to give 
with in the time fixed by it security for the payment of all costs incurred and likely to be incurred by any 
defendant: 
Provided that such an order shall be made in all cases in which it appears to the Court that a sole plaintiff is, 
or (when there are more plaintiffs than one) that all the plaintiff are, residing out of India and that such 
plaintiff does not possess or that no one of such plaintiffs possesses any sufficient immovable property with 
India other than the property in suit. 
(2) Whoever leaves India under such circumstances as to afford reasonable probability that he will not be 
forthcoming whenever he may be called upon to pay costs shall be deemed to be residing out of India within 
the meaning of the proviso to sub-rule (1). 
2 . Effect of failure to furnish security— (1) In the event of such security not being furnished within the time 
fixed, the Court shall make an order dismissing the suit unless the plaintiff or plaintiffs are permitted to 
withdraw therefrom. 
(2) Where a suit is dismissed under this rule, the plaintiff may apply for an order to set the dismissal aside 
and, if it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from 
furnishing the security within the time allowed, the Court shall set aside the dismissal upon such terms as to 
security, costs or otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for proceeding with the suit. 
(3) The dismissal shall not be set aside unless notice of such application has been served on the defendant. 
ORDER XXVI-COMMISSIONS 
Commissions to examine witnesses 
1 . Cases in which Court may issue commission to examine witness— Any Court may in any suit issue a 
commission for the examination on interrogatories or otherwise of any person resident within the local limits 
113

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of its jurisdiction who is exempted under this Code from attending the Court or who is from sickness or 
infirmity unable to attend it: 
[308] [Provided that a commission for examination on interrogatories shall not be issued unless the Court, for 
reasons to be recorded, thinks it necessary so to do. 
Explanation—The Court may, for the purpose of this rule, accept a certificate purporting to be signed by a 
registered medical practitioner as evidence of the sickness or infermity of any person, without calling the 
medical practitioner as a witness.] 
2 . Order for commission— An order for the issue of a commission for the examination of a witness may be 
made by the Court either of its own motion or on the application, supported by affidavit or otherwise, of any 
party to the suit or of the witness to be examined. 
3 . Where witness resides within Court's jurisdiction— A commission for the examination of a person who 
resides within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same may be issued to any person 
whom the Court thinks fit to execute it. 
4 . Persons for whose examination commission may issue— (1) Any Court may in any suit issue a 
commission [309][for the examination on interrogatories or otherwise of—] 
(a) any person resident beyond the local limits of its jurisdiction; 
(b) any person who is about to leave such limits before the date on which he is required to be examined in 
Court; and 
(c) any person in the service of the Government who cannot in the opinion of the Court, attend without 
detriment to the public service: 
[310] [Provided that where, under rule 19 of Order XVI, a person cannot be ordered to attend a Court in 
person, a commission shall be issued for his examination if his evidence is considered necessary in the 
interests of justice: 
Provided further that a commission for examination of such person on interrogatories shall not be issued 
unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, thinks it necessary so to do.] 
(2) Such commission may be issued to any Court, not being a High Court, within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction such person resides, or to any pleader or other person whom the Court issuing the commission 
may appoint. 
(3) The Court on issuing any commission may this rule shall direct whether the commission shall be returned 
to itself or to any subordinate Court. 
5 . Commission or request to examine witness not within India— Where any Court to which application is 
made for the issue of a commission for the examination of a person residing at any place not within India is 
satisfied that the evidence of such person is necessary, the Court may issue such commission or a letter of 
request. 
6 . Court to examine witness pursuant to Commission— Every Court receiving a commission for the 
examination of any person shall examine him or cause him to be examined pursuant thereto. 
7 . Return of commission with depositions of witnesses— Where a commission has been duly executed, it 
shall be returned, together with the evidence taken under it, to the Court from which it was issued, unless the 
order for issuing the commission has otherwise directed, in which case the commission shall be returned in 
terms of such order; and the commission and the returned thereto and the evidence taken under it shall 
[311][subject to the provisions of rule 8] from part of the record of the suit. 
8 . When depositions may be read in evidence— Evidence taken under a commission shall not be read as 
evidence in the suit without the consent of the party against whom the same is offered, unless— 
(a) the person who gave the evidence is beyond the jurisdiction of the Court, or dead or unable from 
sickness or infermity to attend to be personally examined, or exempted from personal appearance in Court or 
is a person in the service of the Government who cannot, in the opinion of the Court, attend without 
detriment to the public service, or 
114

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) the Court in its discretion dispenses with the proof of any of the circumstances mentioned in clause (a) 
and authorizes the evidence of any person being read as evidence in the suit, notwithstanding proof that the 
cause for taking such evidence by commission has ceased at the time of reading the same. 
Commissions for local investigations 
9 . Commissions to make local investigations— In any suit in which the Court deems a local investigation to 
be requisite or proper for the purpose of elecidating any matter in dispute, or of ascertaining the market-value 
of any property, or the amount of any mesne profits or damages or annual net profits, the Court may issue a 
commission to such person as it thinks fit directing him to make such investigation and to report thereon to 
the Court: 
Provided that, where the State Government has made rules as to the persons to whom such commission 
shall be issued, the Court shall be bound by such rules. 
10 . Procedure of Commissioner— (1) The Commissioner, after such local inspection as he deems 
necessary and after reducing to writing the evidence taken by him, shall return such evidence, together with 
his report in writing signed by him, to the Court. 
(2) Report and deposition to be evidence in suit. Commissioner may be examined in person—The report of 
the Commissioner and the evidence taken by him (but not the evidence without the report) shall be evidence 
in the suit and shall form part of the record; but the Court or, with the permission of the Court, any of the 
parties to suit may examine the Commissioner personally in open Court touching any part of the matters 
referred to him or mentioned in his report, or as to his report, or as to the manner in which he has made the 
investigation. 
(3) Where the Court is for any reason dissatisfied with the proceedings of the Commissioner, it may direct 
such further inquiry to be made as it shall think fit. 
[312] [Commissions for scientific investigation, performance of ministerial act and sale of movable property 
10A . Commission for scientific investigation— (1) Where any question arising in a suit involves any scientific 
investigation which cannot, in the opinion of the Court, be conveniently conducted before the Court, the 
Court may, if it thinks it necessary or expedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to 
such person as it thinks fit, directing him to inquire into such question and report thereon to the Court. 
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of the Order shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to a Commissioner 
appointed under this rule as they apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under rule 9. 
10B . Commission for performance of a ministerial act— (1) Where any question arising in a suit involves the 
performance of any ministerial act which cannot, in the opinion of the Court, be conveniently performed 
before the Court, the Court may, if, for reasons to be recorded, it is of opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit, directing him 
to perform that ministerial act and report thereon to the Court. 
10C . Commission for the sale of movable property— (1) Where in any suit, it becomes necessary to sell any 
movable property which is in the custody of the Court pending the determination of the suit and which cannot 
be conveniently preserved, the Court may, if, for reasons to be recorded, it is of opinion that it is necessary 
or expedient in the interests of justice so to do, issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit, directing 
him to conduct such sale and report thereon to the Court. 
(2) The provisions of rule 10 of this Order shall apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under this rule 
as they apply in relation to a Commissioner appointed under rule 9. 
(3) Every such sale shall be held, as far as may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed for the sale 
of movable property in execution of a decree.] 
Commissions to examine accounts 
11 . Commission to examine or adjust accounts— In any suit in which an examination or adjustment of the 
accounts is necessary, the Court may issue a commission to such person as it thinks fit directing him to 
make such examination or adjustment. 
12 . Court to give Commissioner necessary instructions— (1) The Court shall furnish the Commissioner with 
such part of the proceedings and such instructions as appear necessary, and the instructions shall distinctly 
115

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
specify whether the Commissioner is merely to transmit the proceedings which he may hold on the inquiry, or 
also to report his own opinion on the point referred for his examination. 
(2) Proceedings and report to be evidence. Court may direct further inquiry—The proceedings and report (if 
any) of the Commissioner shall be evidence in the suit, but where the Court has reason to be dissatisfied 
with them, it may direct such further inquiry as it shall think fit. 
Commissions to make partitions 
13 . Commission to make partition of immovable property— Where a preliminary decree for partition has 
been passed, the Court may, in any case not provided for by section 54, issue a commission to such person 
as it thinks fit to make the partition or separation according to the rights as declared in such decree. 
14 . Procedure of Commissioner— (1) The Commissioner shall, after such inquiry as may be necessary, 
divide the property into as many shares as may be directly by the order under which the commission was 
issued, and shall allot such shares to the parties, and may, if authorised thereto by the said order, award 
sums to be paid for the purpose of equalizing the value of the shares. 
(2) The commissioner shall then prepare and sign a report or the Commission (where the commission was 
issued to more than one person and they cannot agree) shall prepare and sign separate reports appointing 
the share of each party and distinguishing each share (if so directed by the said order) by metes and bounds. 
Such report or reports shall be annexed to the commission and transmitted to Court; and the Court, after 
hearing any objections which the parties may make to the report or reports, shall confirm, vary or set aside 
the same. 
(3) Where the Court confirms or varies the report or reports it shall pass a decree in accordance with the 
same as confirmed or varied; but where the Court sets aside the report or reports it shall either issue a new 
commission or make such other order as it shall think fit. 
General provisions 
15 . Expenses of commission to be paid into Court— Before issuing any commission under this Order, the 
Court may order such sum (if any ) as it thinks reasonable for the expenses of the commission to be, within a 
time to be fixed, paid into Court by the party at whose instance or for whose benefit the commission is 
issued. 
16 . Powers of Commissioners— Any Commissioner appointed under this Order may, unless otherwise 
directed by the order of appointed. 
(a) examine the parties themselves and any witness whom they or any of them may produce, and any other 
person whom the Commissioner thinks proper to call upon to give evidence in the matter referred to him; 
(b) call for and examine documents and other things relevant to the subject of inquiry; 
(c) at any reasonable time enter upon or into any land or building mentioned in the order. 
[313][16A . Questions objected to before the Commissioner— (1) Where any question put to a witness is 
objected to by a party or his pleader in proceedings before a Commissioner appointed under this Order, the 
Commissioner shall take down the question, the answer, the objections and the name of the party or, as the 
case may be, the pleader so objecting: 
Provided that the Commissioner shall not take down the answer to a question which is objected to on the 
ground of privilege but may continue with the examination of the witness, leaving the party to get the 
question of privilege decided by the Court, and, where the Court decides that there is no question of 
privilege, the witness may be recalled by the Commissioner and examined by him or the witness may be 
examined by the Court with regard to the question which was objected to on the ground of privilege. 
(2) No answer taken down under sub-rule (1) shall be read was evidence in the suit except by the order of 
the Court.] 
17 . Attendance and examination of witnesses before Commissioner— (1) The provisions of this Code 
relating to the summoning, attendance and examination of witnesses, and to the remuneration of, and 
penalties to be imposed upon, witnesses, shall apply to persons required to give evidence or to produce 
documents under this Order whether the commission in execution of which they are so required has been 
116

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
issued by a Court situate within or by a Court situate beyond the limits of India, and for the purposes of this 
rule the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a Civil Court: 
[314] [Provided that when the Commissioner is not a Judge of a Civil Court he shall not be competent to 
impose penalties; but such penalties may be imposed on the application of such Commissioner by the Court 
by which the commission was issued.] 
(2) A Commissioner may apply to any Court (not being a High Court) within the local limits on whose 
jurisdiction a witness resides for the issue of any process which he may find it necessary to issue to or 
against such witness, and such Court may, in its discretion, issue such process as it considers reasonable 
and proper. 
18 . Parties to appear before Commissioner— (1) Where a commission is issued under this Order, the Court 
shall direct that the parties to the suit shall appear before the Commissioner in person or by their agents or 
pleaders. 
(2) Where all or any of the parties do not so appear, the Commissioner may proceed in their absence. 
[315][18A . Application of Order to execution proceedings— The provisions of this Order shall apply so far as 
may be, to proceedings in execution of a decree or order. 
18B . Court to fix a time for return of commission— The Court issuing a commission shall fix a date on or 
before which the commission shall be returned to it after execution, and the date so fixed shall not be 
extended except where the Court, for reasons to be recorded, is satisfied that there is sufficient cause for 
extending the date.] 
Commissions issued at the instance of foreign Tribunals 
19 . Cases in which High Court may issue commission to examine witness— (1) If a High Court is satisfied— 
(a) that a foreign court situated in a foreign country wishes to obtain the evidence of a witness in any 
proceeding before it, 
(b) that the proceeding is of a civil nature, and 
(c) that the witness is residing within the limits of the High Court's appellate jurisdiction, 
it may, subject to the provisions of the rule 20, issue a commission for the examination of such witness. 
(2) Evidence may be given of the matters specified in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-rule (1)— 
(a) by a certificate signed by the consular officer of the foreign country of the highest rank in India and 
transmitted to the High Court through the Central Government, or 
(b) by a letter of request issued by the foreign Court and transmitted to the High Court through the Central 
Government, or 
(c) by a letter of request issued by the foreign Court and produced before the High Court by a party to the 
proceeding. 
20 . Application for issue of commission— The High Court may issue a commission under rule 19— 
(a) upon application by a party to the proceeding before the foreign Court, or 
(b) upon an application by a law officer of the State Government acting under instructions from the State 
Government. 
21 . To whom commission may be issued— A commission under rule 19 may be issued to any Court within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the witness resides, or the witness resides within the local limits of the 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the High Court to any person whom the Court thinks fit to execute the 
commission. 
22 . Issue, execution and return of commissions, and transmission of evidence to foreign Court— The 
provisions of rules 6, 15 [316][Sub-rule (1) of rule 16A, 17, 18 and 18B] of this Order in so far as they are 
applicable shall apply to the issue, execution and return of such commissions, and when any such 
commission has been duly executed it shall be returned, together with the evidence taken under it, to the 
117

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
High Court, which shall forward it to the Central Government, along with the letter of request for transmission 
to the foreign court. 
ORDER XXVII-SUITS BY OR AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OR PUBLIC OFFICERSRIN THEIR 
OFFICIAL CAPACITY 
1 . Suits by or against Government— In any suit by or against the Government the plaint or written statement 
shall be signed by such person as the Government may, by general or special order, appoint in this behalf, 
and shall be verified by any person whom the Government may so appoint and who is acquainted with the 
facts of the case. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh.— In the marginal heading of the Order, after the words "official capacity", insert the words "or 
Statutory Authorities, etc." 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976]. 
2 . Persons authorised to act for Government— Persons being ex officio or otherwise authorised to act for 
the Government in respect of any judicial proceeding shall be deemed to be the recognised agents by whom 
appearances, act and applications under this Code may be made or done on behalf of the Government. 
3 . Plaints in suits by or against Government— In suits by or against the Government instead of inserting in 
the plaint the name and description and place of residence of the plaintiff or defendant, it shall be sufficient to 
insert the appropriate name as provided in section 79. 
4 . Agent for Government to receive process— The Government pleader in any Court shall be the agent of 
the Government for the purpose of receiving processes against the Government issued by such Court. 
5 . Fixing of day for appearance on behalf of Government— The Court, in fixing the day for the Government 
to answer to the plaint, shall allow a reasonable time for the necessary communication with the Government 
through the proper channel, and for the issue of instructions to the Government pleader to appear and 
answer on behalf of the Government and may extend the time at its discretion but the time so extended shall 
not exceed two months in the aggregate.] 
[317][5A . Government to be joined as a party in a suit against a public officer— Where a suit is instituted 
against a public officer for damages or other relief in respect of any act alleged to have been done by him in 
his official capacity, the Government shall be joined as a party to the suit. 
5B . Duty of Court in suits against the Government or a public officer to assist in arriving at a settlement— (1) 
In every suit or proceeding to which the Government, or a public officer acting in his official capacity, is a 
party, it shall be the duty of the Court to make, in the first instance, every endeavour, where it is possible to 
do so consistently with the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist the parties in arriving at a 
settlement in respect of the subject-matter of the suit. 
(2) If, in any such suit or proceeding, at any stage, it appears to the Court that there is a reasonable 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Court may adjourn the proceeding for such period as it 
thinks fit, to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement. 
(3) The power conferred under sub-rule (2) is in addition to any other power of the Court to adjourn 
proceedings.] 
6 . Attendance of person able to answer questions relating to suit against Government— The Court may also 
in any case in which the Government pleader is not accompanied by any person on the part of the 
Government who may be able to answer any material questions relating to the suit, direct the attendance of 
such a person. 
7 . Extension of time to enable public officer to make reference to Government— (1)Where the defended is a 
public officer and, on receiving the summons, considers it proper to make a reference to the Government 
before answering the plaint, he may apply to the Court to grant such extension of the time fixed in the 
summons as may necessary to enable him to make such reference and to receive orders thereon through 
the proper channel. 
(2) Upon such application the Court shall extend the time for so long as appears to it to be necessary. 
118

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 . Procedure in suits against public officer— (1) Where the Government undertakes the defence of a suit 
against a public officer, the Government pleader, upon being furnished with authority to appear and answer 
the plaint, shall apply to the Court, and upon such application the Court shall cause a note of his authority to 
be entered in the register of civil suits. 
(2) Where no application under sub-rule (1) is made by the Government pleader on or before the day fixed in 
the notice for the defendant to appear and answer, the case shall proceed as in a suit between private 
parties: 
Provided that the defendant shall not be liable to arrest, nor his property to attachment, otherwise than in 
execution of a decree. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh.— After rule 9 as inserted by Allahabad High Court insert the following:— 
"10. Suits by or against statutory authority.— (1) Any authority or Corporation, constituted by or under any 
law, may, from time to time, appoint a Standing Counsel, to be called Corporation pleader of that authority in 
any district and give information of such appointment to the District Judge and to Registrar of the High Court 
at Allahabad or at Lucknow Bench, as the case may be. 
(2) The Corporation pleader so appointed shall be the agent in that district of the appointing authority or 
Corporation for purposes of receiving processes against it but shall not act or plead without filing a 
vakalatnama or memorandum of appearance." 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976 amended by Notification dated 10.2.1981]. 
8A . No security to be required from Government or a public officer in certain cases— No such security as is 
mentioned in rules 5 and 6 of Order XLI shall be required from the Government or, where the Government 
has undertaken the defence of the suit, from any public officer sued in respect of an act alleged to be done 
by him in his official capacity. 
8B . Definitions of "Government" and "Government pleader"— In this Order [unless otherwise expressly, 
provided "Government" and "Government pleader" mean respectively— 
(a) in relation to any suit by or against the Central Government, or against a public officer in the service of 
that Government, the Central Government and such pleader as that Government may appoint whether 
generally or specially for the purposes of this Order; 
(c) in relation to any suit by or against a State Government or against a public officer in the service of a 
State, the State Government and the Government pleader as defined in clause (7) of section 2, or such other 
pleader as the State Government may appoint, whether generally or specially, for the purposes of this Order. 
ORDER XXVIIA 
SUITS INVOLVING A SUBSTANTIAL QUESTION OF LAW AS TO THERINTERPRETATION OF THE 
CONSTITUTION [318][OR AS TO THERVALIDITY OF ANY STATUTORY INSTRUMENT] 
1 . Notice to the Attorney General or the Advocate- General— In any suit in which it appears to the Court that 
any such question as is referred to in clause (1) of Article 132, read with Article 147 of the Constitution is 
involved, the Court shall not proceed to determine that question until after notice has been given to the 
Attorney General for India if the question of law concerns the Central Government and to the Advocate-
General of the State if the question of law concerns a State Government. 
[319][1A . Procedure in suits involving validity of any statutory instrument— In any suit in which it appears to 
the Court that any question as to the validity of any statutory instrument, not being a question of the nature 
mentioned in rule 1, is involved, the Court shall not proceed to determine that question except after giving 
notice— 
(a) to the Government pleader, if the question concerns the Government, or 
(b) to the authority which issued the statutory instrument, if the question concerns an authority other than 
Government.] 
119

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
2 . Court may add Government as party— The Court may at any stage of the proceedings order that the 
Central Government or a State Government shall be added as a defendant in any suit involving any such 
question as it referred to in clause (1) of Article 132 read with Article 147, of the Constitution, if the Attorney 
General for India or the Advocate-General of the State, as the case may be, whether upon receipt of notice 
under rule 1, or otherwise, applies for such addition and the Court is satisfied that such addition is necessary 
or desirable for the satisfactory determination of the question of law involved. 
[320][2A . Power of Court to add Government or other authority as a defendant in a suit relating to the validity 
of any statutory instrument— The Court may, at any stage of the proceedings in any suit involving any such 
question as is referred to in rule 1A, order that the Government or other authority shall be added as a 
defendant if the Government pleader or the pleader appearing in the case for the authority which issued the 
instrument, as the case may be, whether upon receipt of notice under rule 1A or otherwise, applies for such 
addition, and the Court is satisfied that such addition is necessary or desirable for the satisfactory 
determination of the question.] 
[321][3 . Costs— Where, under rule 2 or rule 2A the Government or any other authority is added as a 
defendant in a suit, the Attorney-General, Advocate-General or Government Pleader or Government or other 
authority shall not be entitled to, or liable for, costs in the Court which ordered the addition unless the Court, 
having regard to all the circumstances of the case for any special reason, otherwise orders.] 
4 . Application or Order to appeals— In application of this Order to appeals the word "defendant" shall be 
held to include a respondent and the word "suit" an appeal. 
[322] [Explanation—In this Order, "statutory instrument" means a rule, notification, bye-law order, scheme or 
form made as specified under any enactment.] 
ORDER XXVIII-SUITS BY OR AGAINST MILITARY OR NAVAL MEN OR AIRMEN 
1 . Officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen who cannot obtain leave may authorize any person to sue or defend 
for them— (1) Where any officer, soldier, sailor or airman, actual serving under the Government in such 
capacity is a party to a suit, and cannot obtain leave of absence for the purpose of prosecuting or defending 
the suit in person, he may authorize any person to sue or defend in his stead. 
(2) The authority shall be writing and shall be signed by the officer, soldier, sailor or airman in the presence 
of (a) his commanding officer, or the next subordinate officer, if the party is himself the commanding officer, 
or (b) where the officer, soldier, sailor or airman, is serving in military, naval or air force staff employment the 
head or other superior officer of the office in which he is employed. Such commanding or other officer shall 
countersign the authority, which shall be filed in Court. 
(3) When so filed the countersignature shall be sufficient proof that the authority was duly executed, and that 
the officer, soldier, sailor or airman by whom it was granted could not obtain leave of absence for the 
purpose of prosecuting of defending the suit in person. 
Explanation—In this Order the expression "commanding officer" means the officer in actual command for the 
time being of an regiment, corps, ship, detachment or depot which the officer, soldier sailor or airman 
belongs. 
2 . Person so authorized may act personally or appoint pleader— Any person authorized by an officer, 
soldier, sailor or airman to prosecute or defend a suit in his stead may prosecute or defend it in person in the 
same manner as the officer, soldier, sailor or airman could do if present; or he may appoint a pleader to 
prosecute or defend the suit on behalf of such officer, soldier, sailor or airman. 
3 . Service on person so authorized, or on his pleader, to be service— Process served upon any person 
authorized by an officer soldier, sailor or airman under rule 1 or upon any pleader appointed as aforesaid by 
such person shall be as effectual as if they had been served on the party in person. 
ORDER XXIX- SUITS BY OR AGAINST CORPORATIONS 
1 . Subscription and verification of pleading— In suits by or against a corporation, any pleading may be 
signed and verified on behalf of the corporation by the security or by any director or other principal officer of 
the corporation who is able to depose to the facts of the case. 
2 . Service on corporation— Subject to any statutory provision regulating service of process, where the suit is 
against a corporation, the summons may be served— 
120

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
(a) on the secretary, or on any director, or other principal officer of the corporation, or 
(b) by leaving it or sending it by post addressed to the corporation at the registered office, or if there is no 
registered office then at the place where the corporation carries on business. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh— In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh, in Order XXIX, rule 2, insert the following, 
after clause (a):— 
"(aa) on its corporation pleader in the district where the Court issuing summons is located, if one has been 
appointed and the appointment has been notified to the District Judge under rule 10 of Order XXVII, or." 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976]. 
3 . Power to require personal attendance of officer of corporation— The Court may, at any stage of the suit, 
require the personal appearance of the secretary or of any director, or other principal officer of the 
corporation who may be able to answer material questions relating to the suit. 
ORDER XXX- SUITS BY OR AGAINST FIRMS AND PERSONS CARRYING ON BUSINESS IN NAMES 
OTHER THAN THEIR OWN 
1 . Suing of partners in name of firm— (1) Any two or more persons claiming or being liable as partners and 
carrying on business, in India may sue or be sued in the name of the firm (if any) of which such persons were 
partners at the time of the accruing of the cause of action, and any party to a suit may in such case apply to 
the Court for a statement of the names and addresses of the persons who were, at the time of the accruing 
of the cause of action, partners in such firm, to be furnished and verified in such manner as the Court may 
direct. 
(2) Where persons sue or are sued partners in the name of their firm under sub-rule (1), it shall, in the case 
of any pleading or other document required by or under this Code to be signed, verified or certified by the 
plaintiff or the defendant, suffice such pleading or other document is signed, verified or certified by any one 
of such persons. 
2 . Disclosure of partners' names— (1) Where a suit is instituted by partners in the name of their firm, the 
plaintiffs or their pleader shall, on demanding writing by or on behalf of any defendant, forthwith declare in 
writing the names and places of residence of all the persons constituting the firm on whose behalf the suit is 
instituted. 
(2) Where the plaintiffs or their pleader fail to comply with any demand made under sub-rule (1) all 
proceedings in the suit may, upon an application for that purpose, be stayed upon such terms as the Court 
may direct. 
(3) Where the names of the partners are declared in the manner referred to in sub-rule (1) the suit shall 
proceed in the same manner, and the same consequences in all respects shall follow, as if they had been 
named as plaintiffs in the plaint: 
[323] [Provided that all proceedings shall nevertheless continue in the name of the firm, but the name of the 
partners disclosed in the manner specified in sub-rule (1) shall be entered in the decree.] 
3 . Service— Where persons are sued as partners in the name of their firm, the summons shall be served 
either— 
(a) upon any one or more of the partners, or 
(b) at the principal place at which the partnership business is carried on within India upon any person having, 
at the time of service, the control or management or the partnership business, there, 
as the Court may direct; and such service shall be deemed good service upon the firm so sued, whether all 
or any of the partners are within or without India: 
Provided that, in the case of a partnership which has been dissolved to the knowledge of the plaintiff before 
the institution of the suit, the summons shall be served upon every person within India whom it is sought to 
make liable. 
121

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 . Rights of suit on death of partner— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 45 of the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872) where two or more persons may sue or be sued in the name of a firm under 
the foregoing provisions and any of such persons dies, whether before the institution or during the pendency 
of any suit, it shall not be necessary to join the legal representative of the deceased as a party to the suit. 
(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall limit or otherwise effect any right which the legal representative of the 
deceased may have— 
(a) to apply to be made a party to the suit, or 
(b) to enforce any claim against the survivor or survivors. 
5 . Notice in what capacity served— Where a summons is issued to a firm and is served in the manner 
provided by rule 3 , every person upon whom it is served shall be informed by notice in writing given at the 
time of such service, whether he is served as a partner or as a person having the control or management of 
the partnership business, or in both characters, and, in default of such notice, the person served shall be 
deemed to be served as a partner. 
6 . Appearance of partners— Where persons are sued as partners in the name of their firm, they shall 
appear individually in their own names, but all subsequent proceedings shall, nevertheless, continue in the 
name of the firm. 
7 . No appearance except by partners— Where a summons is served in the manner provided by rule 3 upon 
a person having the control or management of the partnership business, no appearance by him shall be 
necessary unless he is a partner of the firm sued. 
[324][8 . Appearance under protest— (1) Any person served with summons as a partner under rule 3 may 
enter an appearance under protest, denying that he was a partner at an material time. 
(2) On such appearance being made, either the plaintiff or the person entering the appearance may, at any 
time before the date fixed for hearing and final disposal of the suit, apply to the Court for determinig whether 
that person was a partner of the firm and liable as such. 
(3) If, on such application, the Court holds that he was a partner at the material time, that shall not preclude 
the person from filing a defence denying the liability of the firm in respect of the claim against the defendant. 
(4) If the Court, however, holds that such person was not a partner of the firm and was not liable as such that 
shall not preclude the plaintiff from otherwise serving a summons on the firm and proceeding with the suit; 
but in that event, the plaintiff shall be precluded from alleging the laibility of that person as a partner of the 
firm in execution of any decree that may be passed against the firm.] 
9 . Suits between co-partners— This Order shall apply to suits between a firm and one or more of the 
partners therein and to suits between firms having one or more partners, in common; but not execution shall 
be issued in such suits except by leave of the Court, and, on an application for leave to issue such execution, 
all such accounts and inquiries may be directed to be taken and made and directions given as may be just. 
[325][10 . Suit against person carrying on business in name other than his own— Any person carrying on 
business in a name or style other than his own name, or a Hindu undivided family carrying on business 
under any name, may be sued in such name or style as if it were a firm name, and, in so far as the nature of 
such case permits, all rules under this Order shall apply accordingly.] 
ORDER XXXI-SUITS BY OR AGAINST TRUSTEES, EXECUTORS AND ADMINISTRATORS 
1 . Representation of beneficiaries in suits concerning property vested in trustees, etc.— In all suits 
concerning property vested in a trustee, executor or administrator, where the contention is between the 
persons beneficially interested in such property and a third person, the trustee; executor or Administator shall 
represent the persons so interested, and it shall not ordinarily be necessary to make them parties to the suit. 
But the Court may, if it thinks fit, order them or any of them to be made parties. 
2 . Joinder of trustee, executors and administrators— Where there are several trustees, executors or 
administrators, they shall all be made parties to a suit against one or more of them: 
Provided that the executors who have not proved their testator's will, and trustees, executors and 
administrators outside India need not be made parties. 
122

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 . Husband of married executrix not to join— Unless the Court directs otherwise, the husband of a married 
trustee, administratrix or executrix shall not as such be a party to a suit by or against her. 
ORDER XXXII 
SUITS BY OR AGAINST MINORS AND PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND 
1 . Minor to sue by next friend— Every suit by a minor shall be instituted in his name by a person who in 
such shall be called the next friend of the minor. 
[326]Explanation—In this Order, "minor" means a person who has not attained his majority within the 
meaning of section 3 of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) where the suit relates to any of the matters 
mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of section 2 of that Act or to any other matter.] 
2 . Where suit is instituted without next friend, plaint to be taken off the file— (1) Where a suit is instituted by 
or on behalf of a minor without a next friend, the defendant may apply to have the plaint taken off the file, 
with costs to be paid by the pleader or other person by whom it was presented. 
(2) Notice of such application shall be given to such person, and the Court, after hearing his objections (if 
any) may make such order in the matter as it thinks fit. 
[327][2A . Security to be furnished by next friend when so ordered— (1) Where a suit has been instituted on 
behalf of the minor by his next friend, the Court may, at any stage of the suit, either of its own motion or on 
the application of any defendant, and for the reasons to be recorded, order the next friend to give security for 
the payment of all costs incurred or likely to be incurred by the defendant. 
(2) Where such a suit is instituted by an indigent person, the security shall include the court-fees payable to 
the Government. 
(3) The provisions of rule 2 of Order XXV shall, so far as may be, apply to a suit where the Court makes an 
order under this rule directing security to be furnished.] 
3 . Guardian for the suit to be appointed by Court for minor defendant— (1) Where the defendant is a minor 
the Court, on being satisfied of the fact of his minority, shall appoint a proper person to be guardian for the 
suit for such minor. 
(2) An order for the appointment of a guardian for the suit may be obtained upon application in the name and 
on behalf of the minor or by the plaintiff. 
(3) Such application shall be supported by an affidavit verifying the fact that the proposed guardian has no 
interest in the matters in controversy in the suit adverse to that of the minor and that he is a fit person to be 
so appointed. 
(4) Order shall be made on any application under this rule except upon notice to any [328]*** to any guardian 
of the minor appointed or declared by an authority competent in that behalf, or, where there is no such 
guardian, [329][upon notice to the father or where there is no father, to the mother, or where there is no 
father or mother, to other natural guardian] of the minor, or, where there is [330][no father, mother or other 
natural guardian], to the person in whose care the minor is, and after hearing any objection which may be 
urged on behalf of any person served with notice under this sub-rule. 
[331][(4A) The Court may, in any case, if it thinks fit, issue notice under sub-rule (4) to the minor also.] 
(5) A person appointed under sub-rule (1) to be guardian for the suit for a minor shall, unless his appointment 
is terminated by retirement, removal or death, continue as such throughout all proceedings arising out of the 
suit including proceedings in any Appellate or Revisional Court and any proceedings in the execution of a 
decree. 
[332][3A . Decree against minor to be set aside unless prejudice has been caused to his interests— (1) No 
decree passed against a minor shall be set aside merely on the ground that the next friend or guardian for 
the suit of the minor had an interest in the subject-matter of the suit adverse to that of the minor, but the fact 
that by reasons of such adverse interest of the next friend of guardian for the suit, prejudice has been caused 
to the interests of the minor, shall be a ground for setting aside the decree. 
123

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Nothing in this rule shall preclude the minor from obtaining any relief available under any law by reason of 
the misconduct or gross negligence on the part of the next friend or guardian for the suit resulting in 
prejudice to the interests of the minor.] 
4 . Who may act as next friend or be appointed guardian for the suit— (1) Any person who is of sound mind 
and has attained majority may act as next friend of a minor or as his guardian for the suit: 
Provided that the interest of such person is not adverse to that of the minor and that he is not, in the case of 
a next friend, a defendant, or, in the case of a guardian for the suit, a plaintiff. 
(2) Where a minor has a guardian appointed or declared by competent authority, no person other than such 
guardian shall act as the next friend of the minor or be appointed his guardian for the suit unless the Court 
considers, for reasons to be recorded, that it is for the minor's welfare that another person be permitted to act 
or be appointed, as the case may be. 
(3) No person shall without his consent [333][in writing] be appointed guardian for the suit. 
(4) Where there is no other person fit and willing to act as guardian for the suit, for Court may appoint any of 
its officers to be such guardian, and may direct that the costs to be incurred by such officer in the 
performance of his duties as such guardian shall be borne either by the parties or by any one or more of the 
parties to the suit, or out of any fund in Court in which the minor is interested [334][or out of the property of 
the minor], and may give directions for the repayment or allowance of such costs as justice and the 
circumstances of the case may require. 
5 . Representation of minor by next friend or guardian for the suit— (1) Every application to the Court on 
behalf of a minor, other than an application under rule 10, sub-rule (2), shall be made by his next friend or by 
his guardian for the suit. 
(2) Every order made in a suit or on any application, before the Court in or by which a minor is in any way 
concerned or affected, without such minor being represented by a next friend or guardian for the suit, as the 
case may be, may be discharged, and, where the pleader of the party at whose instance such order was 
obtained knew, or might reasonably have known, the fact of such minority, with costs to be paid by such 
pleader. 
6 . Receipt by next friend or guardian for the suit of property under decree for minor— (1) A next friend or 
guardian for the suit shall not, without the leave of the Court, receive any money or other movable property 
on behalf of a minor either— 
(a) by way of compromise before decree or order, or 
(b) under a decree or order in favour of the minor. 
(2) Where the next friend or guardian for the suit has not been appointed or declared by competent authority 
to be guardian of the property of the minor, or, having been so appointed or declared, is under any disability 
known to the Court to receive the money or other movable property, the Court shall, if it grants him leave to 
receive the property, require such security and give such directions as will, in its opinion, sufficiently protect 
the property from waste and ensure its proper application: 
[335][Provided that the Court may, for reasons to be recorded, dispense with such security while granting 
leave to the next friend or guardian for the suit to receive money or other movable property under a decree or 
order, where such next friend or guardian— 
(a) is the manager of a Hindu undivided family and the decree or order relates to the property or business of 
the family; or 
(b) is the parent of the minor.] 
7 . Agreement or compromise by next friend or guardian for the suit— (1) No next friend or guardian for the 
suit shall, without the leave of the Court, expressly recorded in the proceedings, enter into any agreement or 
compromise on behalf of a minor with reference to the suit in which he acts as next friend or guardian. 
[336][(1A) An application for leave under sub-rule (1) shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the next friend 
of the guardian for the suit, as the case may be, and also, if the minor is represented by a pleader, by the 
certificate of the pleader, to the effect that the agreement or compromise proposed is, in his opinion, for the 
benefit of the minor: 
124

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided that the opinion so expressed, whether in the affidavit or in the certificate shall not preclude the 
Court from examining whether the agreement or compromise proposed is for the benefit of the minor.] 
(2) Any such agreement or compromise entered into without the leave of the Court so recorded shall be 
voidable against all parties other than the minor. 
8 . Retirement of next friend— (1) Unless otherwise ordered by the Court, a next friend shall not retire 
without first procuring a fit person to be put in his place and giving security for the costs already incurred. 
(2) The application for the appointment of a new next friend shall be supported by an affidavit showing the 
fitness of the person proposed and also that he has no interest adverse to that of the minor. 
9 . Removal of next friend— (1)Where the interest of the next friend of a minor is adverse to that of the minor 
or where he is so connected with a defendant whose interest is adverse to that of the minor as to make it 
unlikely that the minor's interest will be properly protected by him, or where he does not do his duty, or during 
the pendency of the suit, ceases to reside within India or for any other sufficient cause, application may be 
made on behalf of the minor or by a defendant for his removal; and the Court, if satisfied of the sufficiency of 
the cause assigned, may order the next friend to be removed accordingly, and make such other order as to 
costs as it thinks fit. 
(2) Where the next friend is not a guardian appointed or declared by an authority competent in this behalf, 
and an application is made by a guardian so appointed or declared, who desires to be himself appointed in 
the place of the next friend, the Court shall remove that next friend unless it considers, for reasons to be 
recorded by it, that the guardian ought not to be appointed the next friend of the minor and shall thereupon 
appoint the applicant to be next friend in his place upon such terms as to the costs already incurred in the 
suit as it thinks fit. 
10 . Stay of proceedings on removal, etc., of next friend— (1) On the retirement, removal or death of the next 
friend of a minor, further proceedings shall be stayed until the appointment of a next friend in his place. 
(2) Where the pleader of such minor omits, within a reasonable time, to take steps to get a new friend 
appointed, any person interested in the minor or in the matter in issue may apply to the Court for the 
appointment of one, and the Court may appoint such person as it thinks fit. 
11 . Retirement, removal or death of guardian for the suit— (1) Where the guardian for the suit desire to 
retire or does not do his duty, or where there sufficient ground is made to appear, the Court may permit such 
guardian to retire or may remove him, and may make such order as to costs as it thinks fit. 
(2) Where the guardian for the suit retires, dies or is removed by the Court during the pendency of the suit, 
the Court shall appoint a new guardian in his place. 
12 . Course to be followed by minor plaintiff or applicant on attaining majority— (1) A minor plaintiff or a 
minor not a party to a suit on whose behalf an application is pending shall, on attaining majority, elect 
whether he will proceed with the suit or application. 
(2) Where he elects to proceed with the suit or application, he shall apply for an order discharging the next 
friend and for leave to proceed in his own name. 
(3) The title of the suit or application shall in such case be corrected so as to read henceforth thus: 
"A.B., late a minor, by C.D., his next friend, but now having attained majority." 
(4) Where he elects to abandon the suit or application, he shall, if a sole plaintiff or sole applicant, apply for 
an order to dismiss the suit or application on repayment of the costs incurred by the defendant or opposite 
party or which may have been paid by his next friend. 
(5) Any application under this rule may be made ex parte but no order discharging a next friend and 
permitting a minor plaintiff to proceed in his own name shall be made without notice to the next friend. 
13 . Where minor co-plaintiff attaining, majority desires to repudiate suit— (1) Where a minor co-plaintiff on 
attaining majority desires to repudiate the suit, he shall apply to have his name struck out as co-plaintiff; and 
the Court, if it finds that he is not a necessary party shall dismiss him from the suit on such terms as to costs 
or otherwise as it thinks fit. 
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on the next friend, on any co-plaintiff and on the defendant. 
125

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) The costs of all parties of such application, and of all or any proceedings therefore had in the suit, shall 
be paid by such persons as the Court directs. 
(4) Where the applicant is a necessary party to the suit, the Court may direct him to be made a defendant. 
14 . Unreasonable or improper suit— (1) A minor on attaining majority may, if a sole plaintiff, apply that a suit 
instituted in his name by his next friend be dismissed on the ground that it was unreasonable or improper. 
(2) Notice of the application shall be served on all the parties concerned; and the Court, upon being satisfied 
of such unreasonableness or impropriety, grant the application and order the next friend to pay the costs of 
all parties in respect of the application and of anything done in the suit, or make such other order as it thinks 
fit. 
[337][15 . Rules 1 to 14 (except rule 2A) to apply to persons of unsound mind— Rules 1 to 14 (except rule 
2A) shall, so far as may be, apply to persons adjudged, before or during the pendency of the suit, to be of 
unsound mind and shall also apply to persons who, though not so adjudged, are found by the Court on 
enquiry to be incapable, by reason of any mental infirmity, or protecting their interest when suing or being 
sued.] 
[338] [16 . Savings— (1) Nothing contained in this Order shall apply to the Ruler of a foreign State suing or 
being sued in the name of his State, or being sued by the direction of the Central Government in the name of 
an agent or in any other name. 
(2) Nothing contained in this Order shall construed as affecting or in any way derogating from the provisions 
of any local law for the time being in force relating to suits by or against minors or by against lunatics or other 
persons of unsound mind.] 
Order XXXII A ins. by Sec. 80 by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1977). 
[339][ORDER XXXIIA-SUITS RELATING TO MATTERS CONCERNING THE FAMILY 
1 . Application of the Order— (1) The provision of this Order shall apply to suits or proceedings relating to 
matters concerning the family. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-rule (1), the provisions of this 
Order shall apply to the following suits or proceedings concerning the family, namely:— 
(a) a suit or proceeding for matrimonial relief, including a suit or proceeding for declaration as to the validity 
of a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of any person; 
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to legitimacy of any person; 
(c) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the custody of any minor or other 
member of the family, under a disability; 
(d) a suit or proceeding for maintenance; 
(e) a suit or proceeding as to the validity or effect of an adoption; 
(f) a suit or proceeding, instituted by a member of the family relating to wills, intestacy and succession; 
(g) a suit or proceeding relating to any other matter concerning the family in respect of which the parties are 
subject to their personal law. 
(3) So much of this Order as relates to a matter provided for by a special law in respect of any suit or 
proceeding shall not apply to that suit or proceeding. 
2 . Proceedings to be held in camera— In every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, the 
proceeding may be held in camera if the Court so desires and shall be so held if either party so desires. 
3 . Duty of Court to make efforts for settlement— (1) In every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, 
an endeavour shall be made by the Court in the first instance, where it is possible to do so consistent with 
the nature and circumstances of the case, to assist the parties in arriving at a settlement in respect of the 
subject-matter of the suit. 
126

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) If, in any such suit or proceeding, at any stage it appears to the Court that there is a reasonable 
possibility of a settlement between the parties, the Court may adjourn the proceeding for such period as it 
thinks fit to enable attempts to be made to effect such a settlement. 
(3) The power conferred by sub-rule (2) shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other power of 
the Court to adjourn the proceedings. 
4 . Assistance of welfare expert— In every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, it shall be open to 
the Court to secure the services of such person (preferably a woman where available), whether related to the 
parties or not, including a person professionally engaged in promoting the welfare of the family as the Court 
may think fit, for the purpose of assisting the Court in discharging the functions imposed by rule 3 or this 
Order. 
5 . Duty to inquire into facts— In every suit or proceeding to which this Order applies, it shall be the duty of 
the Court to inquire, so far is reasonably can, into the facts alleged by the plaintiff and into any facts alleged 
by the defendant. 
6 . "Family"—meaning of— For the purposes of this Order, each of the following shall be treated as 
constituting a family, namely:— 
(a) (i) a man and his wife living together, 
(ii) any child or children, being issue or theirs; or of such man or such wife, 
(iii) any child or children being maintained by such man or wife; 
(b) a man not having a wife or not living together with his wife, any child or children, being issue of his, and 
any child or children being maintained by him; 
(c) a woman not having a husband or not living together with her husband, any child or children being issue 
of hers, and any child or children being maintained by her; 
(d) a man or woman and his or her brother, sister, ancestor or lineal descendant living with him or her; and 
(e) any combination of one or more of the groups specified in clause (a), clause (b), clause (c) or clause (d) 
of this rule. 
Explanation—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of rule 6 shall be without 
any prejudice to the concept of "family" in any personal law or in any other law for the time being in force.] 
ORDER XXXIII- [340] [SUITS BY INDIGENT PERSONS] 
1 . Suits may be instituted by indigent person— Subject to the following provisions, any suit may be instituted 
by an [341] [indigent person.] 
[342] [Explanation I—A person is an indigent person,— 
(a) if he is not possessed of sufficient means (other than property exempt from attachment in execution of a 
decree and the subject-matter of the suit) to enable him to pay the fee prescribed by law for the plaint in such 
suit, or 
(b) where no such fee is prescribed, if he is not entitled to property worth one thousand rupees other than the 
property exempt from attachment in execution of a decree, and the subject-matter of the suit. 
Explanation II—Any property which is acquired by a person after the presentation of his application for 
permission to sue as an indigent person, and before the decision of the application, shall be taken into 
account in considering the question whether or not the applicant is an indigent person. 
Explanation II—Where the plaintiff sued in a representative capacity, the question whether he is an indigent 
person shall be determined with reference to the means possessed by him in such capacity.] 
[343][1A . Inquiry into the means of an indigent person— Every inquiry into the question whether or not a 
person is an indigent person shall be made, in the first instance, by the chief ministerial officer of the Court, 
unless the Court otherwise directs, and the Court may adopt the report of such officer as its own finding or 
may itself make an inquiry into the question.] 
127

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 . Contents of application— Every application for permission to sue as an [344][indigent person] shall 
contain the particulars required in regard to plaints in suits: a schedule of any movable or immovable 
property belonging to the applicant, with the estimated value thereof, shall be annexed thereto; and it shall 
be signed and verified in the manner prescribed for the signing and verification of pleadings. 
3 . Presentation of application— Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the application shall be 
presented to the Court by the applicant in person, unless he is exempted from appearing in Court, in which 
case the application may be presented by an authorized agent who can answer all material questions 
relating to the application, and who may be examined in the same manner as the party represented by him 
might have been examined had such party attended in person: 
[345][Provided that, where there are more plaintiffs than one, it shall be sufficient if the application is 
presented by one of the plaintiffs.] 
4 . Examination of applicant— (1) Where the application is in proper form and duly presented, the Court may, 
if it thinks fit, examine the applicant, or his agent when the applicant is allowed to appear by agent, regarding 
the merits of the claim and the property of the applicant. 
(2) If presented agent, Court may order applicant to be examined by commission—Where the application is 
presented by an agent, the Court may, if it thinks fit, order that the applicant be examined by a commission in 
the manner in which the examination of an absent witness may be taken. 
5 . Rejection of application— The Court shall reject an application for permission to sue as [346][an indigent 
person]— 
(a) where it is not framed and presented in the manner prescribed by rules 2 and 3, or 
(b) where the applicant is not an [347][indigent persons], or 
(c) where he has, within two months next before the presentation of the application disposed of any property 
fraudulently or in order to be able to apply for permission to sue as [348][an indigent person]: 
[349] [Provided that no application shall be rejected if, even after the value of the property disposed of by the 
applicant is taken into account, the applicant would be entitled to sue as an indigent person,] or 
(d) where his allegations do not show a cause of action, or 
(e) where he has entered into any agreement with reference to the subject-matter of the proposed suit under 
which any other person has obtained an interest in such subject-matter, [350][or] 
[351] [(f) where the allegations made by the applicant in the application show that the suit would be barred by 
any law for the time being in force, or 
(g) where any other person has entered into an agreement with him to finance the litigation.] 
6 . Notice of day for receiving evidence of applicant's indigency— Where the Court sees no reason to reject 
the application on any of the grounds stated in rule 5, it shall fix a day (of which at least ten day's clear notice 
shall be given to the opposite party and the Government pleader) for receiving such evidence as the 
application may adduce in proof of his indigency, and for hearing any evidence which may be adduced in 
disproof thereof. 
7 . Procedure at hearing— (1) On the day so fixed or as soon thereafter as may be convenient the Court 
shall examine the witnesses (if any) produced by either party, and may examine the applicant or his agent, 
and shall make a full record of their evidence. 
[352] [(1A) The examination of the witnesses under sub-rule (1) shall be confined to the matters specified in 
clause (b), clause (c) and clause (e) of rule 5 but the examination of the applicant or his agent may relate to 
any of the matters specified in rule 5.] 
(2) The Court shall also hear any argument which the parties may desire to offer on the question whether, on 
the face of the application and of the evidence (if any) taken by the Court [353][under rule 6 or under this 
rule], the applicant is or is not subject to any of the prohibitions specified in rule 5. 
(3) The Court shall then either allow or refuse to allow the applicant to sue as [354] [an indigent person]. 
128

 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 . Procedure if application admitted— Where the application is granted, it shall be numbered and registered, 
and shall be deemed the plaint in the suit, and the suit proceed in all other respects as a suit instituted in the 
ordinary manner, except that the plaintiff shall not be liable to pay any court-fee [355][or fees payable for 
service of process] in respect of any petition, appointment of a pleader or other proceeding connected with 
the suit. 
9 . Withdrawal of permission to sue as an indigent person— The Court may, on the application of the 
defendant, or of the Government pleader, of which seven days' clear notice in writing has been given to the 
plaintiff, order that the permission granted to the plaintiff to sue as an indigent person be withdrawn— 
(a) if he is guilty of vexatious or improper conduct in the course of the suit; 
(b) if it appears that his means are such that he ought not to continue to sue as [356] [an indigent person]; or 
(c) if he has entered into any agreement with reference to the subject-matter of the suit under which any 
other person has obtained an interested in such subject-matter. 
[357][9A . Court to assign a pleader to an unrepresented indigent person— (1) Where a person, who is 
permitted to sue as an indigent person, is not represented by a pleader, the Court may, if the circumstances 
of the case so require, assign a pleader to him. 
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules providing for— 
(a) the mode of selecting pleaders to be assigned under sub-rule (1); 
(b) the facilities to be provided to such pleaders by the Court; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be or may be provided by the rules for giving effect to the provisions 
of sub-rule (1).] 
10 . Costs were indigent person succeeds— Where the plaintiff succeeds in the suit, the Court shall calculate 
the amount of court-fees which would have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as 
an [358][indigent person]; such amount shall be recoverable by the State Government any party order by the 
decree to pay the same and shall be a first charge on the subject-matter of the suit. 
11 . Procedure where indigent person fails— Where the plaintiff fails in the suit or the permission granted to 
him to sue as an indigent person has been withdrawn, or where the suit is withdrawn or dismissed,— 
(a) because the summons for the defendant to appear and answer has not been served upon him in 
consequence of the failure of the plaintiff to pay the court-fee or postal charges (if any) chargeable for such 
service [359][or to present copies of the plaint or concise statement], or 
(b) because the plaintiff does not appear when the suit is called on for hearing, 
the Court shall order the plaintiff, or any person added as a co-plaintiff to the suit, to pay the court-fees which 
would have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as an [360][indigent person]. 
11A . Procedure where indigent persons suit abates— Where the suit abates by reason of the death of the 
plaintiff or of any person added as a co-plaintiff, the Court shall order that amount of court-fees which would 
have been paid by the plaintiff if he had not been permitted to sue as an [361][indigent person] shall be 
recoverable by the State Government from the estate of the deceased plaintiff.] 
12 . State Government may apply for payment of court-fees— The State Government shall have the right at 
any time to apply to the Court to make an order for the payment of court-fees under rule 10, rule 11 or rule 
11A. 
13 . State Government to be deemed a party— All matters arising between the State Government and any 
party to the suit under rule 10, rule 11 rule 11A or rule 12 shall be deemed to be questions arising between 
the parties to the suit within the meaning of section 47. 
14 . Recovery of amount of court-fees.— Where an order is made under rule 10, rule 11 or rule 11A, the 
court shall forthwith cause a copy of the decree or order to be forwarded to the Collector who may, without 
prejudice to any other mode of recovery, recover the amount of court-fees specified therein from the person 
or property liable for the payment as if it were an arrear of land revenue. 
129

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 . Refusal to allow applicant to sue as indigent person to bar subsequent application of like nature— An 
order refusing to allow the applicant top sue as [362] [indigent person] shall be a bar to any subsequent 
application of the like nature by him in respect of the same right to sue; but the applicant shall be at liberty to 
institute a suit in the ordinary manner in respect of such right; [363][Provided that the plaint shall be rejected 
if he does not pay, either at the time of the institution of the suit or within such time thereafter as the Court 
may allow,] the costs (if any) incurred by the State Government and by the opposite party in opposing his 
application for leave to sue as an [364][indigent person.] 
[365][15A . Grant of time for payment of court-fee— Nothing contained in rule 5, rule 7 or rule 15 shall 
prevent a Court, while rejecting an application under rule 5 or refusing an application under rule 7, from 
granting time to the applicant to pay the requisite court-fee within such time as may be fixed by the Court or 
extended by it from time to time; and upon such payment and on payment of the costs referred to in[1]**** 
rule 15 with in that time, the suit shall be deemed to have been instituted on the date on which the 
application for permission to sue as an indigent person was presented.] 
16 . Costs— The costs of an application for permission to sue as an [366][indigent person] and of an inquiry 
into indigency shall be costs in the suit. 
[367][17 . Defence by an indigent person— Any defendant, who desire to plead a set-off or counter-claim, 
may be allowed to set up such claim as an indigent person, and the rules contained in this Order shall so far 
as may be, apply to him as if he were a plaintiff and his written statement were a plaint. 
18 . Power of Government to provide for free legal services to indigent persons— (1) Subject to the 
provisions of this Order, the Central or State Government may make such supplementary provisions as it 
thinks fit for providing free legal services to those who have been permitted to sue as indigent persons. 
(2) The High Court may, with previous approval of the State Government, make rules for carrying out the 
supplementary provisions made by the Central or State Government for providing free legal services to 
indigent persons referred to in sub-rule (1), and such rules may include the nature and extent of such legal 
services, the conditions under which they may be made available, the matters in respect of which, and the 
agencies through which, such services may be rendered.] 
ORDER XXXIV-SUITS RELATING TO MORTGAGES OF IMMOVABLE PROPERTY 
1 . Parties to suits for foreclosure sale and redemption— Subject to the provisions of this Code, all persons 
having an interest either in the mortgage-security or in the right of redemption shall be joined as parties to 
any suit relating to the mortgage. 
Explanation—A puisne mortgagee may sue for foreclosure or for sale without making the prior mortgagee a 
party to the suit; and a prior mortgage need not be joined in a suit to redeem a subsequent mortgage. 
2 . Preliminary decree in foreclosure suit— (1) In a suit for foreclosure, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court 
shall pass a preliminary decree— 
(a) ordering that an account be taken of what was due to the plaintiff at the date of such decree for— 
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage, 
(ii) the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him, and 
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by him up to that date in respect of his mortgage-
security, together with interest thereon; or 
(b) declaring the mount so due at that date, and 
(c) directing— 
(i) that, if the defendant pays into Court the amount so found or declared due on or before such date as the 
Court may fix within six months from the date on which the Court confirms and countersigns the account 
taken under clause (a), or from the date on which such amount is declared in Court under clause (b), as the 
case may be, and thereafter pays such amount as may be adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, 
charges and expenses as provided in rule 10, together with subsequent interest on such sums respectively 
as provided in rule 11, the plaintiff shall deliver up to the defendant, or to such person as the defendant 
appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property, and shall, if so 
required, re-transfer the property to the defendant at his cost free from the mortgage and from all 
130

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
incumbrances created by the plaintiff or any person claiming under him, or, where the plaintiff claims by 
derived title, by those under whom he claims, and shall also, if necessary, put the defendant in possession of 
the property; and 
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due under or by the preliminary decree is not made on or 
before the date so fixed, or the defendant fails to pay, within such time as the Court may fix the amount 
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest, the plaintiff shall be entitled to 
apply for a final decree debarring the defendant from all right to redeem the property. 
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from time to time, at any 
time before a final decree is passed, extend the time fixed for the payment of the amount found or declared 
due under sub-rule (1) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses 
and interest. 
(3) Where, in a suit for foreclosure, subsequent mortgagees or persons deriving title from, or subrogated to 
the rights, of any such mortgagees are joined as parties, the preliminary decree shall provide for the 
adjudication of the respective rights and liabilities of the parties to the suit in the manner and form set forth in 
Form No. 9 or Form No. 10 as the case may be, of Appendix D with such variations as the circumstances of 
the case may require. 
3 . Final decree in foreclosure suit— (1) Where, before a final decree debarring the defendant from all right to 
redeem the mortgaged property has been passed, the defendant makes payment into Court of all amounts 
due from him under sub-rule (1) of rule 2, the Court shall, on application made by the defendant in this 
behalf, pass a final decree— 
(a) ordering the plaintiff to deliver up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree, and, if necessary— 
(b) ordering him to re-transfer at the cost or the defendant the mortgaged property as directed in the said 
decree, 
and also, if necesssary— 
(c) ordering him to put the defendant in possession of the property. 
(2) Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application made 
by the plaintiff in his behalf, pass a final decree declaring that the defendant and all persons claiming through 
or under him or debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged property and also, if necessary ordering the 
defendant to put the plaintiff in possession of the property. 
(3) On the passing of a final decree under sub-rule (2), all liabilities to which the defendant is subject in 
respect of the mortgage or on account of the suit shall be deemed to have been discharged. 
4 . Preliminary decree in suit for sale— (1) In a suit for sale, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court shall pass a 
preliminary decree to the effect mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c) (i) of sub-rule (1) of rule 2, and further 
directing that, in default of the defendant paying as therein mentioned, the plaintiff shall be entitled to apply 
for a final decree directing that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the proceeds 
of the sale (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and applied in payment 
of what has been found or declared under or by the preliminary decree due to the plaintiff, together with such 
amount as may have been adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest, 
and the balance, if any, be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to receive the same. 
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from time to time, at any 
any time before a final decree for sale is passed, extend the time fixed for the payment of the amount found 
or declared due under sub-rule (1) or of the amount adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges, 
expenses and interest. 
(3) Power to decree sale in foreclosure suit—In a suit for foreclosure in the case of an anomalous mortgage, 
if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court may, at the instance of any party to the suit or of any other person 
interested in all mortgage-security or the right of redemption, pass a like decree (in lieu of a decree for 
foreclosure) on such terms as it thinks fit, including the deposit in Court of a reasonable sum fixed by the 
Court to meet the expenses of the sale and to secure the performance of the terms. 
(4) Where, in a suit for sale or a suit for foreclosure in which sale is ordered, subsequent mortgagees or 
persons deriving title from, or subrogated to the rights of, any such mortgagees are joined as parties, the 
131

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
preliminary decree referred to in sub-rule (1) shall provide for the adjudication of the respective rights and 
liabilities of the parties to the suit in the manner and form set forth in Form No. 9, Form No. 10 or Form No. 
11, as the case may be, of Appendix D with such variations as the circumstances of the case may require. 
5 . Final decree in suit for sale— (1) Where, on or before the day fixed or at any time before the confirmation 
of a sale made in pursuance of a final decree passed under sub-rule (3) of this rule, the defendant makes 
payment into Court of all amounts due from him under sub-rule (1) of rule 4, the Court shall, on application 
made by the defendant in this behalf, pass final or, if such decree has passed, an order— 
(a) ordering the plaintiff to deliver up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree, 
and if necessary— 
(b) ordering him to transfer the mortgaged property as directed in the said decree, 
and, also, if necessary— 
(c) ordering him to put the defendant in possession of the property. 
(2) Where the mortgaged property or part thereof has been sold in pursuance of a decree passed under sub-
rule (3) of this rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub-rule (1) of this rule, unless the defendant in 
addition to the amount mentioned in sub-rule (1), deposits in Court for payment to the purchaser a sum equal 
to five per cent, of the amount of the purchase-money paid into Court by the purchaser. 
Where such deposit has been made, the purchaser shall be entitled to an order for repayment of the amount 
of the purchase-money paid into Court by him, together with a sum equal to five per cent thereof. 
(3) Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application made 
by the plaintiff in this behalf, pass a final decree directing that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part 
thereof be sold, and that the proceeds of the sale be dealt with in the manner provided in sub-rule (1) of rule 
4. 
6 . Recovery of balance due on mortgage in suit for sale— Where the net proceeds of any sale held under 
[368][rule 5] are found insufficient to pay the amount due to the plaintiff, the Court, on application by him 
may, if the balance is legally recoverable from the defendant otherwise than out of the property sold, pass a 
decree for such balance. 
7 . Preliminary decree is redemption suit— (1) In a suit for redemption, if the plaintiff succeeds, the Court 
shall pass a preliminary decree— 
(a) ordering that an account be taken of what was due to the defendant at the date of such decree for— 
(i) principal and interest on the mortgage, 
(ii) the costs of suit, if any, awarded to him, and 
(iii) other costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by him up to the date, in respect of his mortgage-
security, together with interest thereon; or 
(b) declaring the amount so at that date; and 
(c) directing— 
(i) that, if the plaintiff pays into Court the amount so found or declared due on or before such date as the 
Court may fix within six months from the date on which the Court confirms and countersigns the account 
taken under clause (a), or from the date on which such amount is declared in Court under clause (b), as the 
case may be, and thereafter pays such amount as may be adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, 
charges and expenses and provided in rule 10, together with subsequent interest on such sums respectively 
as provided in rule 11, the defendant shall deliver up to the plaintiff, or to such person as the plaintiff appoints 
all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property, and shall, if so required, 
retransfer the property to the plaintiff at his cost free from the mortgage and from all incumbrances created 
by the defendant or any person claiming under him where the defendant claims by derived title, by those 
under whom he claims, and shall also, if necessary put the plaintiff in possession of the property; and 
(ii) that, if payment of the amount found or declared due under or by the preliminary decree is not made on or 
before the date so fixed, or the plaintiff fails to pay, within such time as the Court may fix, the amount 
132

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
adjudged due in respect of subsequent costs, charges expenses and interest, the defendant shall be entitled 
to apply for a final decree— 
(a) in the case of a mortgage other than a usufructuary mortgage, a mortgage by conditional sale, or an 
anomalous mortgage the terms of which provide for foreclosure only and not for sale, that the mortgage 
property be, sold, or 
(b) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or such an anomalous mortgage as aforesaid, that the 
plaintiff be debarred from all right to redeem the property. 
(2) The Court may, on good cause shown and upon terms to be fixed by the Court, from time to time, at any 
time before the passing of a final decree for foreclosure of sale, as the case may be, extend due in respect of 
subsequent costs, charges, expenses and interest. 
8 . Final decree in redemption suit— (1) Where, final decree debarring the plaintiff from all right to redeem 
the mortgaged property has been passed or before the confirmation of a sale held in pursuance of a final 
decree passed under sub-rule (3) of this rule, the plaintiff makes payment into Court of all amounts due from 
him under sub-rule (1) of rule 7, the Court shall, on application made under by the plaintiff in this behalf, pass 
a final decree or, if such decree has been passed, an order— 
(a) ordering the defendant to deliver up the documents referred to in the preliminary decree, and, if 
necessary,— 
(b) ordering him to re-transfer at the cost of the plaintiff the mortgaged property as directed in the said 
decree, 
and also, if necessary,— 
(c) ordering him to put the plaintiff in possession of the property. 
(2) Where the mortgaged property or a part thereof has been sold in pursuance of a decree passed under 
sub-rule (3) of this rule, the Court shall not pass an order under sub-rule (1) of this rule, unless the plaintiff in 
addition to the amount mentioned is sub-rule (1), deposits in the Court for payment to the purchaser a sum 
equal to five per cent, of the amount of the purchase-money paid into by the purchaser. 
Where such deposit has been made, the purchaser shall be entitled to an order for repayment of the amount 
of the purchase-money paid into Court by him, together with a sum equal to five per cent, thereof. 
(3) Where payment in accordance with sub-rule (1) has not been made, the Court shall, on application made 
by the defendant in this behalf,— 
(a) in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or of such an anomalous mortgage as is hereinbefore 
referred to in rule 7, pass a final decree declaring that the plaintiff and all persons claiming under him are 
debarred from all right to redeem the mortgaged property and, also, if necessary, ordering the plaintiff to put 
the defendant in possession of the mortgaged property; or 
(b) in the case of any other mortgage, not being a usufructuary mortgage, pass a final decree that the 
mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and the proceeds of the sale (after deduction 
therefrom of the expenses of the sale) be paid into Court and applied in payment of what is found due to the 
defendant, and the balance, if any, be paid to the plaintiff or other persons entitled to receive the same. 
8A . Recovery of balance due on mortgage in suit for redemption— Where the net proceeds of any sale held 
under [369][rule 8] are found insufficient to pay the amount due to the defendant, the Court, [370][on 
application by him in execution], may, if the balance is legally recoverable from the plaintiff otherwise than 
out of the property sold, pass a decree for such balance. 
9 . Decree where nothing is found due or where mortgagee has been overpaid— Notwithstanding anything 
hereinbefore contained, if it appears, upon taking the account referred to in rule 7, that nothing is due to the 
defendant or that he has been overpaid, the Court shall pass a decree directing the defendant, if so required, 
to re-transfer the property and to pay to the plaintiff and amount which may be found due to him; and the 
plaintiff shall, if necessary, be put in possession of the mortgaged property. 
10 . Costs of mortgagee subsequent to decree— In finally adjusting the amount to be paid to a mortgagee in 
case of a foreclosure, sale or redemption, the Court shall, unless in the case of costs of the suit the conduct 
of the mortgagee has been such as to disentitle him thereto, add to the mortgage-money such costs of the 
133

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
suit and other costs, charges and exepenses as have been properly incurred by him since the date of the 
preliminary decree for foreclosure, sale or redemption up to the time of actual payment: 
[371][Provided that where the mortgagor, before or at the time of the institution of the suit, tenders or 
deposits the amount due on the mortgage, or such amount as is not substantially deficient in the opinion of 
the Court, he shall not be ordered to pay the costs of the suit to the mortgagee and the mortgagor shall be 
entitled to recover his own costs of the suit from the mortgagee, unless the Court, for reasons to be 
recorded, otherwise directs.] 
[372][10A . Power of Court to direct mortgagee to pay BImesne profits— Where in a suit for foreclosure, the 
mortgagor has, before or at the time of the institution of the suit, tendered or deposited the sum on the 
mortgage, or such sum as is not substantially deficient in the opinion of the Court, the Court shall direct the 
mortgagee to pay to the mortgagor mesne profits for the period beginning with the institution of the suit.] 
11 . Payment of interest— In any decree passed in a suit for foreclosure, sale or redemption, where interest 
is legally recoverable, the Court may order payment of interest to the mortgagee as follows, namely:— 
(a) interest up to the date on or before which payment of the amount found or declared due is under the 
preliminary decree to be made by the mortgagor or other person redeeming the mortgage— 
(i) on the principal amount found or declared due on the mortgage,—at the rate payable on the principal, or, 
where such rate at the Court deems reasonable and, 
(iii) on the amount adjudged due to the mortgagee for costs, charges and expenses properly incurred by the 
mortgagee in respect of the mortgagee-security up to the date of the preliminary decree and added to the 
mortgage-money,—at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate, at such rate not exceeding 
six per cent, per annum as the Court deems reasonable; and 
(b) subsequent interest up to the date of realisation or actual payment on the aggregate of the principal sums 
specified in clause (a) as calculated in accordance with that clause at the such rate as the Court deems 
reasonable. 
12 . Sale of property subject to prior mortgage— Where any property the sale of which is directed under this 
Order is subject to a prior mortgage, the Court may, with the consent of the prior mortgagee, direct that the 
property be sold free from the same, giving to such prior mortgagee the same interest in the proceeds of the 
sale as he had in the property sold. 
13 . Application of proceeds— (1) Such proceeds shall be brought into Court and applied as follows:— 
first, in payment of all expenses incident to the sale or properly incurred in any attempted sale; 
secondly, in payment of whatever is due to the prior mortgagee on account of the prior mortgage, and of 
costs properly incurred in connection therewith; 
thirdly, in payment of all interest due on account of the mortgage is consequence whereof the sale was 
directed, and of the costs of the suit in which the decree directing the sale was made; 
fourthly, in payment of the principal money due on account of that mortgage; and 
lastly, the residue (if any) shall be paid to the person proving himself to be interested in the property sold, or 
if there are more such persons than one, then to such persons according to their respective interests therein 
or upon their joint receipt. 
(2) Nothing in this rule or in rule 12 shall be deemed to affect the powers conferred by section 57 of the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882). 
14 . Suit for sale necessary for bringing mortgaged property to sale— (1) Where a mortgagee has obtained a 
decree for the payment of money in satisfaction of a claim arising under the mortgage, he shall not be 
entitled to bring the mortgaged property to sale otherwise than by instituting a suit for sale in enforcement of 
the mortgage, and he may institute such suit notwithstanding anything contained in Order II, rule 2. 
(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) shall apply to any territories to which the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 
1882), has not been extended. 
134

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 . Mortgages by the deposit of title deeds and charges— [373][(1)] All the provisions contained in this 
Order which apply to a simple mortgage shall, so far as may be, apply to a mortgage by deposit of title-deeds 
within the meaning of section 58, and to a charge within the meaning of section 100 of the Transfer of 
Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882); 
[374] [(2) Where a decree orders payment of money and charges it on immovable property on default of 
payment, the amount may be realised by sale of that property in execution of that decree.] 
ORDER XXXV- INTERPLEADER 
1 . Plaint in interpleader-suit— In every suit of interpleader the plaint shall, in addition to the other statements 
necessary for plaints, state— 
(a) that the plaintiff claims no interest in the subject-matter in dispute other than for charges or costs; 
(b) the claims made by the defendants severally; and 
(c) that there is no collusion between the plaintiff and any of the defendants. 
2 . Payment of thing claimed into Court— Where the thing claimed is capable of being paid into Court or 
placed in the custody of the Court, the plaintiff may be required to so pay or place it before the he can be 
entitled to any order in the suit. 
3 . Procedure where defendant is suing plaintiff— Where any of the defendants in an interpleader-suit is 
actually suing the plaintiff in respect the subject-matter of such suit, the Court in which the suit against the 
plaintiff is pending shall, on being informed by the Court in which the interpleader-suit has been instituted, 
stay the proceedings as against him; and his costs in the suit so stayed may be provided for in such suit; but 
if, and in so far as, they are not provided for in that suit, they may be added to his costs incurred in the 
interpleader-suit. 
4 . Procedure at first hearing— (1) At the first hearing the Court may— 
(a) declare that the plaintiff is discharged from all liability to the defendants in respect of the thing claimed, 
award him his costs, and dismiss him from the suit; or 
(b) if it thinks that justice or convenience so require, retain all parties until the final disposal of the suit. 
(2) Where the Court finds that the admissions of the parties or other evidence enable it to do so, it may 
adjudicate the title to the thing claimed. 
(3) Where the admissions of the parties do not enable the Court so to adjudicate, it may direct— 
(a) that an issue or issues between the parties be framed and tried, and 
(b) that any claimant be made a plaintiff in lieu of or in addition to the original plaintiff, 
and shall proceed to try the suit in the ordinary manner. 
5 . Agents and tenants may not institute interpleader suits— Nothing in the Order shall be deemed to enable 
agents to sue their principles, or tenants to sue their landlords, for the purpose of compelling them to 
interplead with any person other than persons making claim through such principals or landlords. 
Illustrations 
(a) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. C alleges that the jewels were wrongfully obtained from 
him by A, and claims them from B. B cannot institute an interpleader-suit against A and C. 
(b) A deposits a box of jewels with B as his agent. He then writes to C for the purpose of making the jewels a 
security for a debt due from himself to C. A afterwards alleges that C's debt is satisfied, and C alleges the 
contrary. Both claim the jewels from B. B may institute in interpleader-suit against A and C. 
6 . Charge for plaintiff's costs— Where the suit is properly instituted the Court may provide for the costs of 
the original plaintiff by giving him a charge on the thing claimed or in some other effectual way. 
ORDER XXXVI-SPECIAL CASE 
135

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
1 . Power to state case for Court's opinion— (1) Parties claiming to be interested in the decision of any 
question of fact or law may enter into an agreement in writing stating such question in the form of a case for 
the opinion of the Court, and providing that, upon the finding of the Court with respect to such question,— 
(a) a sum of money fixed by the parties or to be determined by the Court shall be paid by one of the parties 
to the other of them; or 
(b) some property, movable or immovable, specified in the agreement, shall be delivered by one of the 
parties to the other of them; or 
(c) one or more of the parties shall do, or refrain from doing, some other particular act specified in the 
agreement. 
(2) Every case stated under this rule shall be divided into consecutively numbered paragraphs, and shall 
concisely state such facts and specify such documents as may be necessary to enable the Court to decide 
the question raised thereby. 
2 . Where value of subject-matter must be stated— Where the agreement is for the delivery of any property; 
or for the doing, or the refraining from doing, any particular act, the estimated value of the property to be 
delivered, or to which the act specified has reference, shall be stated in the agreement. 
3 . Agreement to be filed and registered as suit— (1) The agreeement if framed in accordance with the rules 
hereinbefore contained, may be filed [375][with an application] in the Court which would have jurisdiction to 
entertain a suit, the amount or value of the subject-matter of which is the same as the amount or value of the 
subject-matter of the agreement. 
(2)[376] [The application] when so filed, shall be numbered and registered as a suit between one or more of 
the parties claiming to be interested as plaintiff or plaintiffs, and the other or the others of them as defendant 
or defendants; and notice shall be given to all the parties to the agreement, other than the party or parties by 
whom [377][the application was presented.] 
4 . Parties to be subject to Court's jurisdiction— Where the agreement has been filed, the parties to it shall 
be subject to the jurisdiction of the Court and shall be bound by the statements contained therein. 
5 . Hearing and disposal of case— (1) The case shall be set down for hearing as a suit instituted in the 
ordinary manner, and the provisions of this Code shall apply to such suit so far as the same are applicable. 
(2) Where the Court is satisfied, after examination of the parties, or after taking such evidence as it thinks 
fit— 
(a) that the agreement was duly executed by them, 
(b) that they have a bona fide interest in the question stated therein, and 
(c) that the same is fit to be decided, 
it shall proceed to pronounce judgment thereon, in the same way as in an ordinary suit, and upon the 
judgment so pronounced a decree shall follow. 
[378] [6 . No appeal from a decree passed under rule 5— No appeal shall lie from a decree passed under 
rule 5.] 
ORDER XXXVII-SUMMARY PROCEDURE 
[379][1 . Courts and classes of suits to which the Order is to apply— (1) This Order shall apply to the 
following Court, namely:— 
(a) High Courts, City Civil Courts and Courts of Small Causes; and 
(b) other Courts; 
Provided that in respect of the Courts referred to in clause (b), the High Court may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, restrict the operation of this Order only to such categories of suits as it deems proper, and 
may also, from time to time, as the circumstances of the case may require, by subsequent notification in the 
Official Gazette, further restrict, enlarge or vary, the categories of suits to be brought under the operation of 
this Order as it deems proper. 
136

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (1) the Order applies to the following classes of suits, namely:— 
(a) suits upon bills of exchange, hundies and promissory notes; 
(b) suits in which the plaintiff seeks only to recover a debt or liquidated demand in money payable by the 
defendant, with or without interest, arising,— 
(i) on a written contract, or 
(ii) on an enactment, where the sum sought to be recovered is a fixed sum of money or in the nature of a 
debt other than a penalty; or 
(iii) on a guarantee, where the claim against the principal is in respect of a debt or liquidated demand only.] 
[380][2 . Institution of summary suits— (1) A suit, to which this Order applies, may if the plaintiff desires to 
proceed hereunder, be instituted by presenting a plaint which shall contain,— 
(a) a specific averment to the effect that the suit is filed under this Order; 
(b) that no relief, which does not fall within the ambit of this rule, has been claimed in the plaint; 
(c) the following inscription, immediately below the number of the suit in the title of the suit, namely:— 
"(Under Order XXXVII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1907)." 
(2) the summons of the suit shall be in Form No. 4 in Appendix B or in such other form as may, from time to 
time, be prescribed. 
(3) The defendant shall not defend the suit referred to in sub- rule (1) unless he enters an appearance and in 
default of his entering an appearance the allegations in the plaint shall be deemed to be admitted and the 
plaintiff shall entitled to a decree for any sum, not exceeding the sum mentioned in the summons, together 
with interest at the rate specified, if any, up to the date of the decree and such sum for costs as may be 
determined by the High Court from time to time by rules made in that behalf and such decree may be 
executed forthwith.] 
[381][3 . Procedure for the appearance of defendant— (1) In a suit to which this Order applies, the plaintiff 
shall, together with the summons under rule 2, serve on the defendant a copy of the plaint and annexures 
thereto and the defendant may, at any time within ten days of such service, enter an appearance either in 
person or by pleader and, in either case, he shall file in Court an address for service of notices on him. 
(2) Unless otherwise order, all summonses, notices and other judicial processes, required to be served on 
the defendant, shall deemed to have been duly served on him if they are left at the address given by him for 
such service. 
(3) On the day of entering the appearance, notice of such appearance shall be given by the defendant to the 
plaintiff's pleader, or, if the plaintiff sues in person, to the plaintiff himself, either by notice delivered at or sent 
by pre-said letter directed to the address of the plaintiff's pleader or of the plaintiff, as the case may be. 
(4) If the defendant enters an appearance, the plaintiff shall thereafter serve on the defendant a summons for 
judgment in Form No. 4A in Appendix B for such other Form as may be prescribed from time to time, 
returnable not less than ten days from the date of service supported by an affidavit verifying the cause of 
action and the amount claimed and stating that in his belief there is no defence to the suit. 
(5) The defendant may, at any time within ten days from service of such summons for judgment, by affidavit 
or otherwise disclosing such facts as may be deemed sufficient to entitle him to defend, apply on such 
summons for leave to defend such suit, and leave to defend may be granted to him unconditionally or upon 
such terms as may appear to the Court or Judge to be just: 
Provided that leave to defend shall not be refused unless the Court is satisfied that the facts disclosed by the 
defendant do not indicate that he has a substantial defence to raise or that the defence intended to be put up 
by the defendant is frivolous or vexatious: 
Provided further that, where a part of the amount claimed by the the plaintiff is admitted by the defendant to 
be due from him, leave to defend the suit shall not be granted unless the amount so admitted to be due is 
deposited by the defendant in Court. 
137

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) At the hearing of such summons for judgment,— 
(a) if the defendant has not applied for leave to defend, or if such application has been made and is refused, 
the plaintiff shall be entitled to judgment forthwith; or 
(b) if the defendant is permitted to defend as to the whole or any part of the claim, the Court or Judge may 
direct him to give such security and within such time as may be fixed by the Court or Judge and that, on 
failure to give such security with the time specified by the Court or Judge or to carry out such other directions 
as may have been given by the Court or judge, the plaintiff shall be entitled to judgment forthwith. 
(7) The Court or Judge may, for sufficient cause shown by the defendant, execute the delay of the defendant 
in entering an appearance or in applying for leave to defend the suit.] 
4 . Power to set aside decree— After decree for the Court may, under special circumstances set aside the 
decree, and if necessary stay or set aside execution, and may give leave to the defendant to appear to the 
summons and to defend the suit, if it seems reasonable to the Court so to do, and on such terms as the 
Court thinks fit. 
5 . Power to order bill, etc., to be deposited with officer of Court— In any proceeding under this Order the 
Court may order the bill, hundi or note on which the suit is founded to be forthwith deposited with an officer of 
the Court, and may further order that all proceedings shall be stayed until the plaintiff gives security for the 
costs thereof. 
6 . Recovery of cost of noting non-acceptance of dishonoured bill or note— The holder of every dishonoured 
bill of exchange or promissory note shall have the same remedies for the recovery of the expenses incurred 
in noting the same for non-acceptance or non-payment otherwise, by reason of such dishonour, as he has 
under this Order for the recovery of the amount of such bill or note. 
7 . Procedure in suits— Save as provided by this Order, the procedure in suits hereunder shall be the same 
as the procedure in suits instituted in the ordinary manner. 
ORDER XXXVIII-ARREST AND ATTACHMENT BEFORE JUDGMENT 
Arrest before judgment 
1 . Where defendant may be called upon to furnish security for appearance— Where at any stage of a suit, 
other than a suit of the nature referred to in section 16, clauses (a) to (d), the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or 
otherwise,— 
(a) that the defendant, with intent to delay the plaintiff, or to avoid any process of the Court or to obstruct or 
delay the execution of any decree that may be passed against him— 
(i) has absconded or left the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court, or 
(ii) is about to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Court his property or any part thereof, 
or 
(b) that the defendant is about to leave India under circumstances affording reasonable probability that the 
plaintiff will or may thereby be obstructed or delayed in the execution of any decree that may be passed 
against the defendant in the suit, 
the Court may issue a warrant to arrest the defendant and bring him before the Court to show cause why he 
should not furnish security, for his appearance: 
Provided that the defendant shall not be arrested if he pays to the officer enstrusted with the execution of the 
warrant any sum specified in the warrant as sufficient to satisfy the plaintiff's claim; and such sum shall be 
held in deposit by the Court until the suit is disposed of or until the further order of the Court. 
2 . Security— (1) Where the defendant fails to show such cause the Court shall order him either to deposit in 
Court money or other property sufficient answer the claim against him, or to furnish security for his 
appearance at any time when called upon while the suit is pending and until satisfaction of any decree that 
may be passed against him in the suit, or make such order as it thinks fit in regard to the sum which may 
have paid by the defendant under the provison to the last preceding rule. 
138

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Every surety for the appearance of a defendant shall bind himself, in default of such appearance, to pay 
any sum of money which the defendant may be ordered to pay in the suit. 
3 . Procedure on application by surety to be discharged— (1) A surety for the appearance of a defendant 
may at any time apply to the Court in which he became such surety to be discharged from his obligation. 
(2) On such application being made, the Court shall summon the defendant to appear or, if it thinks fit may 
issue a warrant for his arrest in the first instance. 
(3) On the appearance of the defendant in pursuance of the summons or warrant, or on his voluntary 
surrender, the Court shall direct the surety to be discharged from his obligation, and shall call upon the 
defendant to find fresh security. 
4 . Procedure where defendant fails to furnish security or find fresh security— Where the defendant fails to 
comply with any order under rule 2 or rule 3, the Court may commit him to the civil prison until the decision of 
the suit or, where a decree is passed against the defendant, until the decree has been satisfied: 
Provided that no person shall be detained in prison under this rule in any case for a longer period than six 
months, nor for a longer period than six weeks when the amount or value of the subject-matter of the suit 
does not exceed fifty rupees: 
Provided also that no person shall be detained in prison under this rule after he has complied with such 
order. 
Attachment before judgment 
5 . Where defendant may be called upon to furnish security for production of property— (1) Where, at any 
stage of a suit, the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or otherwise, that the defendant, with intent to obstruct or 
delay the execution of any decree that may be passed against him,— 
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or 
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the local limits of the jurisdiction of the 
Court, 
the Court may direct the defendant, within a time to be fixed by it, either to furnish security, in such sum as 
may be specified in the order, to produce and place at the disposal of the Court, when required, the said 
property or the value of the same, or such portion thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the decree, or to 
appear and show cause why he should not furnish security. 
(2) The plaintiff shall, unless the court otherwise directs, specify the property required to be attached and the 
estimated value thereof. 
(3) The Court may also in the order direct the conditional attachment of the whole or any portion of the 
property so specified. 
[382] [(4) If an order of attachment is made without complying with the provisions of sub-rule (1) of this rule 
such attachment shall be void.] 
6 . Attachment where cause not shown or security not furnished— (1) Where the defendant fails to show 
cause why he should not furnish security, or fails to furnish the security required, within the time fixed by the 
Court, the Court may order that the property specified, or such portion thereof as appears sufficient to satisfy 
any decree which may be passed in the suit, be attached. 
(2) Where the defendant shows such cause of furnishes the required security, and the property specified or 
any portion of it has been attached, the Court shall order the attachment to be withdrawn, or make such 
other order as it thinks fit. 
7 . Mode of making attachment— Save as otherwise expressly provided, the attachment shall be made in the 
manner provided for the attachment of property in execution of a decree. 
[383][8 . Adjudication of claim to property attached before judgment— Where any claim is preferred to 
property attached before judgment, such claim shall be adjudicated upon in the manner hereinbefore 
provided for the adjudicated of claims to property attached in execution of a decree for the payment of 
money.] 
139

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
9 . Removal of attachment when security furnished or suit dismissed— Where an order is made for 
attachment before judgment, the Court shall order the attachment to be withdrawn when the defendant 
furnishes the security required, together with security for the cost of the attachment, or when the suit is 
dismissed. 
10 . Attachment before judgment not to affect rights of strangers, nor bar decree-holder from applying for 
sale— Attachment before judgment shall not affect the rights, existing prior to the attachment, of persons not 
parties to the suit, nor bar any person holding a decree against the defendant from applying for the sale of 
the property under attachment in execution of such decree. 
11 . Property attached before judgment not to be re-attached in execution of decree— Where property is 
under attachment by virtue of the provisions of this order and a decree is subsequently passed in favour of 
the plaintiff, it shall not be necessary upon a application for execution of such decree to apply for a re­
attachment of the property. 
[384][11A . Provisions applicable to attachment— (1) The provisions of this Code applicable to an 
attachment made in execution of a decree shall so far as may be, apply to an attachment made before 
judgment which continues after the judgment by virtue of the provisions of rule 11. 
(2) An attachment made before judgment in a suit which is dismissed for default shall not become revived 
merely by reason of the fact that the order for the dismissal of the suit for default has been set aside and the 
suit has been restored.] 
12 . Agricultural produce not attachable before judgment— Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to 
authorize the plaintiff to apply for the attachment of any agricultural produce in the possession of an 
agriculturist, or to empower the Court to order the attachment or production of such produce. 
13 . Small Cause Court not to attach immovable property— Nothing in this Order shall be deemed to 
empower any Court of Small Causes to make order for the attachment of immovable property. 
ORDER XXXIX-TEMPORARY INJUNCTIONS AND INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS 
Temporary injunctions 
1 . Cases in which temporary injunction may be granted— Where in any suit it is proved by affidavit or 
otherwise— 
(a)that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or alienated by any party to 
the suit, or wrongfully sold in a execution of a decree, or 
(b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose of his property with a view to 
[385][defrauding] his creditors, 
[386] [(c) that the defendant threatens to dispossess, the plaintiff or otherwise cause injury to the plaintiff in 
relation to any property in dispute in the suit,] 
the Court may be order grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act, or make such other order for the 
purpose of staying and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale, removal or disposition of the 
property [387][or dispossession of the plaintiff, or otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff in relation to any 
property in dispute in the suit] as the Court thinks fit, until the disposal of the suit or until further orders. 
2 . Injunction to restrain repetition or continuance of breach— (1) In any suit for restraining the defendant 
from committing a breach of contract or other injury of any kind, whether compensation is claimed in the suit 
or not, the plaintiff may, at any time after the commencement of the suit, and either before or after judgment, 
apply to the Court for a temporary injunction to restrain the defendant from committing the breach of contract 
or injury complained, of, or any breach of contract or injury of a like kind arising out of the same contract or 
relating to the same property or right. 
(2) The Court may be order grant such injunction, on such terms as to the duration of the injunction, keeping 
an account, giving security, or otherwise, as the Court thinks fit. 
[388][* * * * ] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
140

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Madhya Pradesh.— In Order 39, rule 2, in sub-rule (2), insert the following proviso:— 
"Provided that no such injunction shall be granted— 
(a) where no perpetual injunction could be granted in view of the provisions of section 38 and section 41 of 
the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963); or 
(b) to stay, the operation of an order for transfer, suspension, reduction in rank, compulsory retirement, 
dismmissal, removable or otherwise termination of service of, or taking charge from, any person appointed to 
public service and post in connection with the affairs of the State including any employee of any company or 
Corporation owned or controlled by the State Government; or 
(c) to stay, any disciplinary proceeding, pending or intended 
or, the effect of any adverse entry against any, person appointed to public service and post in connection 
with the affairs of the State including any employee of the company owned or controlled by the State 
Government; or 
(d) to restrain any election; or 
(e) to restrain any auction intended to be made or, to restrain the effect of any auction made by the 
Government; or to stay the proceedings for the recovery of any dues recoverable as land revenue unless 
adequate security is furnished; and any order for injuction granted in contravention of these provisions shall 
be void." 
[M.P. Act 29 of 1984]. 
Uttar Pradesh.— In rule 2, sub-rule (2), interest the following proviso:— 
"Provided that no such injunction shall be granted— 
(a) where no perpetual injunction could be granted in view of the provisions of section 38 and section 41 of 
the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (47 of 1963), or 
(b) to stay the operation of an order for transfer, suspension, reduction in rank, compulsory retirement, 
dismissal, removal or otherwise termination of service of, or taking charge from, any employee including any 
employee of the Government, or 
(c) to stay any disciplinary proceeding pending or intended, or, the effect of any adverse entry, against any 
employee of the Government, or 
(d) to affect the internal management or affairs of any educational institution including a University, or a 
Society, or 
(e) to restrain any election, or 
(f) to restrain, any auction intended to be made or, the effect of any auction made, by the Government unless 
adequate security is furnished, or 
(g) to stay the proceedings of the recovery of any dues recoverable as land revenue unless adequate 
security is furnished, or 
(h) in any matter where a reference can be made to the Chancellor of a University under any enactment for 
the time being inforce; 
and any order for injunction granted in contravention of these provisions shall be void". 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976 amended by Notification dated 3.10.1981]. 
[389][2A . Consequence of disobedience or breach of injunction— (1) In the case of disobedience of any 
injunction granted or other order made under rule 1 or rule 2 or breach of any of the terms on which the 
injunction was granted or the order made, the Court granting the injunction or making the order, or any Court 
to which the suit or proceeding is transferred, may order the property of the person guilty of such 
disobedience or breach to be attached, and may also order such person to be detained in the civil prison for 
a term not execeding three months, unless in the meantime the Court directs his release. 
141

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) No attachment made under this rule shall remain in force for more than one year, at the end of which time 
if the disobedience or breach continues, the property attached may be sold and out of the proceeds, the 
Court may award such compensation as it thinks fit to the injured party and shall pay the balance, if any, to 
the party entitled thereto.] 
3 . Before granting injunction, Court to direct notice to opposite party— The Court shall in all case, except 
where it appears that the object of granting the injunction would be defeated by the delay, before granting an 
injunction, direct notice of the application for the same to be given to the opposite party: 
[390] [Provided that, where it is proposed to grant an injunction without giving notice of the application to the 
opposite party, the Court shall record the reasons for its opinion that the object of granting the injunction 
would be defeated by delay, and require the applicant— 
(a) to deliver to the opposite party, or to send to him by registered post, immediately after the order granting 
the injunction has been made, a copy of the application for injunction together with— 
(i) a copy of the affidavit filed in support of the application; 
(ii) a copy of the plaint; and 
(iii) copies of documents on which the applicant relies, and 
(b) to file, on the day on which such injunction is granted or on the day immediately following that day, an 
affidavit stating that the copies aforesaid have been so delivered or sent.] 
[391][3A . Court to dispose of application for injunction within thirty days.— Where an injunction has been 
granted without giving notice to the opposite party, the Court shall make an endeavour to finally dispose of 
the application within thirty day from the date on which the injunction was granted; and where it is unable so 
to do, it shall record its reasons for such inability.] 
4 . Order for injunction may be discharged, varied or set aside— Any order for an injunction may be 
discharged, or varied, or set aside by the Court, on application made thereto by any party dissatisfied with 
such order: 
[392] [Provided that if in an application for temporary injunction or in any affidavit support such application a 
part has knowingly made a false or misleading statement in relation to a material particular and the injunction 
was granted without giving notice to the opposite party, the Court shall vacate the injunction unless, for 
reasons to be recorded, it considers that it is not necessary so to do in the interests of justice: 
Provided further that where an order for injunction has been passed after giving to a party an opportunity of 
being heard, the order shall not be discharged, varied or set aside on the application of that party except 
where such discharge, variation or setting aside has been necessitated by a change in the circumstances, or 
unless the Court is satisfied that the order has caused under hardship to that party.] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Madhya Pradesh.— In Rule 4:— 
(i) after the words "by the Court", inserted the words "for reasons to be recorded, either on its own motion or"; 
and 
(ii) at the end, add the following proviso:— 
"Provided also that if at any stage of the suit it appears to the Court that the party in whose favour the order 
of injunction exists is delaying the proceedings or is otherwise abusing the process of Court, it shall set aside 
the order of injunction." 
[M.P. Act 29 of 1984]. 
Uttar Pradesh.— Same as that of Madhya Pradesh except for the word "delaying" substitute "dilating" in the 
proviso. 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976]. 
142

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 . Injunction to corporation binding on its officer— An injunction directed to a corporation is binding not only 
on the corporation itself, but also on all members and officers of the corporation whose personal action it 
seeks to restrain. 
Interlocutory orders 
6 . Power to order interim sale— The Court may, on the application of any party to a suit, order the sale, by 
any person named in such order, and in such manner and on such terms as it thinks fit, of any movable 
property being the subject-matter of such suit or attached before judgment in such suit, which is subject to 
speedy and natural decay, or which for any other just and sufficient cause it may be desirable to have sold at 
once. 
7 . Detention, preservation, inspection, etc., of subject-matter of suit — (1) the Court may, on the application 
of any party to a suit, and on such terms as it thinks fit,— 
(a) make an order for the detention, preservation or inspection of any property which is the subject-matter of 
such suit or, as to which any question may arise therein; 
(b) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorize any person to enter upon or into any land or building in 
the possession of any other party to such suit; and 
(c) for all or any of the purposes aforesaid authorize any samples to be taken, or any observation to be made 
or experiment to be tried, which may seem necessary or expendient for the purpose of obtaining full 
information or evidence. 
(2) The provisions as to execution of process shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to person authorized to enter 
under this rule. 
8 . Application for such orders to be after notice— (1) An application by the plaintiff for an order under rule 6 
or rule may be made[393]****at any time after institution of the suit. 
(2) An application by the defendant for a like order may be made[394]***at any time after appearance. 
[395] [(3) Before making an order under rule 6 or rule 7 on an application made for the purpose, the Court 
shall except where it appears that the object of making such order would be defeated by the delay, direct 
notice thereof to be given to the opposite party.] 
9 . When party may be put in immediate possession of land the subject-matter of suit— Where land paying 
revenue to Government, or a tenure liable to sale, is the subject-matter of a suit, if the party in possession of 
such land or tenure neglects to pay the Government revenue, or the rent due to the proprietor of the tenure, 
as the case may be, and such land or tenure is consequently ordered to be sold, any other party to the suit 
claiming to have an interest in such land or tenure may, upon payment of the revenue or rent due previously 
to the sale (and with or without security at the discretion of the Court), be put in immediate possession of the 
land or tenure; 
and the Court in its decree may award against the defaulter the amount so paid, with interest thereon at such 
rate as the Court thinks fit, or may charge the amount so paid, with interest thereon at such rate as the Court 
orders, in any adjustment of accounts which may be directed in the decree passed in the suit. 
10 . Deposit of money, etc. in Court— Where the subject-matter of a suit is money or some other thing 
capable of delivery and any party thereto admits that he holds such money or other thing as a trustee for 
another party, or that it belongs or is due to another party, the Court may order the same to be deposited in 
Court or delivered to such last-named party, with or without security, subject to the further direction of the 
Court. 
ORDER XL- APPOINTMENT OF RECEIVERS 
1 . Appointment of receivers— (1) Where it appears to the Court to be just and convenient, the Court may by 
order— 
(a) appointment a receiver of any property, whether before or after decree; 
(b) remove any person from the possession or custody of the property; 
(c) commit the same to the possession, custody or management of the receiver; and 
143

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) confer upon the receiver all such powers, as to bringing and defending suits and for the realization, 
management, protection, preservation and improvement of the property, the collection of the rents and profits 
thereof, the application and disposal of such rents and profits, and the execution of documents as the owner 
himself has, or such those powers as the Court thinks fit. 
(2) Nothing in this rule shall authorize the Court to remove from the possession or custody of property any 
person whom any party to the suit has not a present right so to remove. 
2 . Remuneration— The Court may be general or special order fix the amount to be paid as remuneration for 
the services of the receiver. 
3 . Duties— Every receiver so appointed shall— 
(a) furnish such security (if any) as the Court thinks fit, duly to account for what he shall receive in respect of 
the property; 
(b) submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as the Court directs; 
(c) pay the amount due from him as the Court directs; and 
(d) be responsible for any loss occasioned to the property by his wilful default or gross negligence. 
4 . Enforcement of receiver's duties— Where a receiver— 
(a) fails to submit his accounts at such periods and in such form as the Court directs, or 
(b) fails to pay the amount due from him as the Court directs, or 
(c) occasions loss to the property by his wilful default or gross negligence, 
the Court may direct his property to be attached and may sell such property, and may apply the proceeds to 
make good any amount found to be due from his or any loss occasioned by him, and shall pay the balance (if 
any) to the receiver. 
5 . When Collector may be appointed receiver— Where the property is land paying revenue to the 
Government, or land of which the revenue has been assigned or redeemed, and the Court considers that the 
interests of those concerned will be promoted by the management of the Collector, the Court may, with the 
consent of the Collector appoint him to be receiver of such property. 
ORDER XLI-APPEALS FROM ORIGINAL DECREES 
1 . Form of appeal. What to accompany memorandum— (1) Every appeal shall be preferred in the form of a 
memorandum signed by the appellant or his pleader and presented to the Court or to such officer as it 
appoints in this behalf. The memorandum shall be accompanied by a copy of the decree appealed from and 
(unless the Appellate Court dispenses therewith) of the judgment on which it is founded: 
[396] [Provided that where two or more suits have been tried together and a common judgment has been 
delivered therefor and two or more appeals are filed against any decree covered by that judgment, whether 
by the same appellant or by different appellants, the Appellate Court dispense with the filing of more than 
one copy of the judgment.] 
(2) Contents of memorandum—The memorandum shall set forth, concisely and under distinct heads, the 
grounds of objection to the decree appealed from without any argument or narrative; and such grounds shall 
be numbered consecutively. 
[397] [(3) Where the appeal is against a decree for payment of money, the appellant shall, within such time 
as the Appellate Court may allow, deposit the amount disputed in the appeal or furnish such security in 
respect thereof as the Court may think fit.] 
2 . Grounds which may be taken in appeal— The appellant shall not except by leave of the Court, urge or be 
heard in support of any ground of objection not set forth in the memorandum of appeal, but the Appellate 
Court in deciding the appeal, shall not be confined to the grounds of objections set forth in the memorandum 
of appeal or taken by leave of the Court under this rule: 
Provided that the Court shall not rest its decision on any other ground unless the party who may be affected 
thereby has had a sufficient opportunity of contesting the case on that ground. 
144

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 . Rejection or amendment of memorandum— (1) Where the memorandum of appeal is not drawn up in the 
manner hereinbefore prescribed, it may be rejected, or be returned to the appellant for the purpose of being 
amended within a time to be fixed by the Court or be amended then and there. 
(2) Where the Court rejects any memorandum, it shall record the reasons for such rejection. 
(3) Where a memorandum of appeal is amended, the Judge, or such officer as he appoints in this behalf, 
shall sign or initial the amendment. 
[398][3A . Application for condonation of delay— (1) When a appeal is presented after the expiry of the 
period of limitation specified therefor, it shall be accompanied by an application supported by affidavit setting 
forth the facts on which the appellant relies to satisfy the Court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring 
the appeal within such period. 
(2) If the Court sees no reason to reject the application without the issue of a notice to the respondent, notice 
hereof shall be issued to the respondent and the matter shall be finally decided by the Court before it 
proceeds to deal with the appeal under rule 11 or rule 13, as the case may be. 
(3) Where an application has been made under sub-rule (1) the Court shall not made an order fact the stay 
of execution of the decree against which the appeal is proposed to be filed so long as the Court does not, 
after hearing under rule 11, decide to hear the appeal.] 
4 . One of several plaintiff or defendants may obtain reversal of whole decree where it proceeds on ground 
common to all— Where there are more plaintiff or more defendants then one in a suit, and the decree 
appealed from proceeds on any ground common to all the plaintiffs or to all the defendants, any one of the 
plaintiffs or of the defendants may appeal from the whole decree, and thereupon the Appellate Court may 
reverse or vary the decree in favour of all the plaintiffs or defendants, as the case may be. 
Stay of proceedings and of execution 
5 . Stay by Appellate Court— (1) An appeal shall not operate as a stay of proceedings under a decree or 
order appealed from except so far as the Appellate Court may order, nor shall execution of a decree be 
stayed by reason only of an appeal having been preferred from the decree; but the Appellate Court may for 
sufficient cause order stay of execution of such decree. 
[399] [Explanation—An order by the Appellate Court for the stay of execution of the decree shall be effective 
from the date of the communication of such order to the Court of first instance but an affidavit sworn by the 
appellant, based on his personal knowledge, stating that an order for the stay of execution of the decree has 
been made by the Appellate Court shall, pending the receipt from the Appellate Court of the order for the 
stay of execuiton or any order to the contrary, be acted upon by the Court of first instance.] 
(2) Stay by Court which passed the decree—Where an application is made for stay of execution of an 
appealable decree before the expiration of the time allowed for appealing therefrom, the Court which passed 
the decree may on sufficient cause being shown order the execution to be stayed. 
(3) No order for stay of execution shall be made under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) unless the Court making it 
is satisfied— 
(a) that substantial loss may result to the party applying for stay of execution unless the order is made; 
(b) that the application has been made without unreasonable delay; and 
(c) that security has been given by the applicant for the due performance of such decree or order as may 
ultimately be binding upon him. 
(4) [400][Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (3)], the Court may make an ex parte order for stay of 
execution pending the hearing of the application. 
[401] [(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-rules, where the appellant fails to make 
the deposit or furnish the security specified in sub-rule (3) of rule 1, the Court shall not make an order staying 
the execution of the decree.] 
6 . Security in case of order for execution of decree appealed from— (1) Where an order is made for the 
execution of a decree from which an appeal is pending, the Court which passed the decree shall, on 
sufficient cause being shown by the appellant, require security to be taken for the restitution of any property 
145

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
which may be or has been taken in execution of the decree or for the payment of the value of such property 
and for the due performance of the decree or order of the Appellate Court, or the Appellate Court may for like 
cause direct the Court which passed the decree to take such security. 
(2) Where an order has been made for the sale of immovable property in execution of a decree, and an 
appeal is pending from such decree, the sale shall, on the application of the judgment- debtor to the Court 
which made the order, be stayed on such terms as to giving security or otherwise as the Court thinks fit until 
the appeal is disposed of. 
7 . No security to be required from the Government or a public officer in certain cases. Rep. by the A.O. 
1937.] 
8 . Exercise of powers in appeal from order made in execution of decree— The powers conferred by rules 5 
and 6 shall be exercisable where an appeal may be or has been preferred not from the decree but from an 
order made in execution of such decree. 
Procedure on admission of appeal 
9 . Registry of memorandum of appeal— (1) Where a memorandum of appeal is admitted, the Appellate 
Court or the proper officer of that Court shall endorse thereon the date of presentation, and shall register the 
appeal in a book to be kept for the purpose. 
(2) Register of Appeals—Such book shall be called the Register of Appeals. 
10 . Appellate Court may require appellant to furnish security for costs— (1) The Appellate Court may in its 
discretion, either before the respondent is called upon to appear and answer or afterwards on the application 
of the respondent, demand from the appellant security for the costs of the appeal, or of the original suit, or of 
both: 
Where appellant resides out of India—Provided that the Court shall demand such security in all cases in 
which the appellant is residing out of India, and is not possessed of any sufficient immovable property within 
India other than the property (if any) to which the appeal relates. 
(2) Where such security is not furnished within such time as the Court orders, the Court shall reject the 
appeal. 
11 . Power to dismiss appeal without sending notice to Lower Court— (1) The Appellate Court, after sending 
for the record if it thinks fit so to do, and after fixing a day for hearing the appellant or his pleader and hearing 
him accordingly if he appears on that day, may dismiss the appeal without sending notice to the Court from 
whose decree the appeal is preferred and without serving notice on the respondent or his pleader. 
(2) If on the day fixed or any other day to which the hearing may be adjourned the appellant does not appear 
when the appeal is called on for hearing, the Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed. 
(3) The dismissal of an appeal under this rule shall be notified to the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred. 
[402] [(4) Where an Appellate Court, not being the High Court, dismisses an appeal under sub-rule (1), it 
shall deliver a judgment, recording in brief its grounds for doing so, and a decree shall be drawn up in 
accordance with the judgment.] 
[403][11A . Time within which hearing under rule 11 should be concluded— Every appeal shall be heard 
under rule 11 as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude such hearing within 
sixty days from the date on which the memorandum of appeal is filed.] 
12 . Day for hearing appeal— (1) Unless the Appellate Court dismisses the appeal under rule 11, it should fix 
a day for hearing the appeal. 
(2) Such day shall be fixed with reference to the current business of the Court, the place of residence of the 
respondent, and the time necessary for the service of the notice of appeal, so as to allow the respondent 
sufficient time to appear and answer the appeal on such day. 
13 . Appellate Court to give notice to Court whose decree appealed from— (1) Where the appeal is not 
dismissed under rule 11, the Appellate Court shall send notice of the appeal to the Court from whose decree 
the appeal is preferred. 
146

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) Transmission of papers to Appellate Court—Where the appeal is from the decree of a Court, the records 
of which are not deposited in the Appellate Court, the Court receiving such notice shall send with all 
practicable despatch all material papers in the suit, or such papers as may be specially called for by the 
Appellate Court. 
(3) Copies of exhibits in Court whose decree appealed from—Either party may apply in writing to the Court 
from whose decree the appeal is preferred, specifying any of the papers in such Court of which he requires 
copies to be made; and copies of such papers shall be made at the expense of, and given to, the applicant. 
14 . Publication and service of notice of day for hearing appeal— (1) Notice of the day fixed under rule 12 
shall be affixed in the Appellate Court-house, and a like notice shall be sent by the Appellate Court to the 
Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, and shall be served on the respondent or on his pleader in 
the Appellate Court in the manner provided for the service on a defendant of a summons to appear and 
answer; and all the provisions applicable to such summons, and to proceedings with reference to the service 
thereof, shall apply to the service of such notice. 
(2) Appellate Court may itself cause notice to be served—Instead of sending the notice to the Court from 
whose decree the appeal is preferred, the Appellate Court may itself cause the notice to be served on the 
respondent or his pleader under the provisions above referred to. 
[404] [(3) The notice to be served on the respondent shall be accompanied by a copy of the memorandum of 
appeal. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in sub- rule (1), it shall not be necessary to serve 
notice of any proceeding incidental to an appeal on any respondent other than a person impleaded for the 
first time in the Appellate Court, unless he has appeared and filed an address for the service in the Court of 
first instance or has appeared in the appeal. 
(5) Nothing in sub-rule (4) shall bar the respondent referred to in the appeal from defending it.] 
15 . Contents of notice— The notice to the respondent shall declare that, if he does not appear in the 
Appellate Court on the day so fixed, the appeal will be heard ex parte. 
Procedure on hearing 
16 . Right to begin— (1) On the day fixed, or on any other day to which the hearing may be adjourned, the 
appellant shall he heard in support of the appeal. 
(2) The Court shall then, if it does not dismiss the appeal at once, hear the respondent against the appeal 
and in such case the appellant shall be entitled to reply. 
17 . Dismissal of appeal for appellants default— (1) Where on the day fixed, or on any other day which the 
hearing may be adjourned, the appellant does not appear when the appeal is called on for hearing, the Court 
may make an order that the appeal be dismissed. 
[405] [Explanation—Nothing in this sub-rule shall be construed as empowering the Court to dismiss the 
appeal on the merits.] 
(2) Hearing appeal BIex parteB—Where the appellant appears and the respondent does not appear the 
appeal shall be heard ex parte, 
18 . Dismissal of appeal where notice not served in consequence of appellant's failure to deposit costs— 
Where on the day fixed, or on any other day to which the hearing may be adjourned, it is found that the 
notice to the respondent has not been served in consequence of the failure of the appellant to deposit, within 
the period fixed, the sum required to defray the costs of serving the notice [406][or, if the notice is returned 
unserved, and it is found that the notice to the respondent has not been issued in consequence of the failure 
of the appellant to deposit, within any subsequent period fixed, the sum required to defray the cost of any 
further attempt to serve the notice,] the Court may make an order that the appeal be dismissed: 
Provided that no such order shall be made although the notice has not been served upon the respondent, if 
on any such day the respondent appears when the appeal is called on for hearing. 
19 . Re-admission of appeal dismissed for default— Where an appeal is dismissed under rule 11, sub-rule 
(2) or rule 17 or rule 18, the appellant may apply to the Appellate Court for the re-admission of the appeal; 
and, where it is proved that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the appeal was 
147

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
called on for hearing or from depositing the sum so required, the Court shall re-admit the appeal on such 
terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit. 
20 . Power to adjourn hearing and direct persons appearing interested to be made respondents— [407][(1)] 
Where it appears to the Court at the hearing that any person who was a party to the suit in the Court from 
whose decree the appeal is preferred, but who has not been made a party to the appeal, is interested in the 
result of the appeal, the Court may adjourn the hearing to a future day to be fixed by the Court and direct that 
such person be made a respondent. 
[408] [(2) No respondent shall be added under this rule, after the expiry of the period of limitation for appeal, 
unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded, allows that to be done, on such terms as to costs as it thinks 
fit.] 
21 . Re-hearing on application of respondent against whom BIex parte decree made— Where an appeal is 
heard ex parte and judgment is pronounced against the respondent, he may apply to the Appellant Court to 
re-hear the appeal; and, if he satisfies the Court that the notice was not duly served or that he was prevented 
by sufficient cause from appearing when the appeal was called on for hearing, the Court shall re-hear the 
appeal on such terms as to costs or otherwise as it thinks fit to impose upon him. 
22 . Upon hearing respondent may object to decree as if he had preferred a separate appeal— (1) Any 
respondent, though he may not have appealed from any part of the decree, may not only support the decree 
[409][but may also state that the finding against him in the Court below in respect of any issue ought to have 
been in his favour; and may also take any cross-objection] to the decree which he could have taken by way 
of appeal provided he has filed such objection in the Appellant Court within one month from the date of 
service on him or his pleader of notice of the day fixed for hearing the appeal, or within such further time as 
the Appellate Court may see fit to allow. 
[410] [Explanation—A respondent aggrieved by a finding of the Court in the judgment on which the decree 
appealed against is based may, under this rule, file cross-objection in respect of the decree in so far as it is 
based on that finding, notwithstanding that by reason of the decision of the Court on any other finding which 
is sufficient for the decision of the suit, the decree, is, wholly or in part, in favour of that respondent.] 
(2) Form of objection and provisions applicable thereto—Such cross-objection shall be in the form of a 
memorandum, and the provisions of rule 1, so far as they relate to the form and contents of the 
memorandum of appeal, shall apply thereto. 
(3) Unless the respondent files with the objection a written acknowledgement from the party who may be 
affected by such objection or his pleader of having received a copy thereof, the Appellate Court shall cause a 
copy to be served, as soon as may be after the filing of the objection, on such party or his pleader at the 
expense of the respondent. 
(4) Where, in any case in which any respondent has under this rule filed a memorandum of objection, the 
original appeal is withdrawn or is dismissed for default, the objection so filed may nevertheless be heard and 
determined after such notice to the other parties as the Court thinks fit. 
(5) The provisions-relating to appeal by indigent persons shall, so far as they can be made applicable apply 
to an objection under this rule. 
23 . Remand of case by Appellate Court— Where the Court from whose decree an appeal is preferred has 
disposed of the suit upon a preliminary point and the decree is reversed in appeal, the Appellate Court may, 
if it thinks fit, by order remand the case, and may further direct what issue or issues shall be tried in the case 
so remanded, and shall send a copy of its judgment and order to the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred, which directions to re-admit the suit under its original number in the register of civil suits, and 
proceed to determine the suit; and the evidence (if any) recorded during the original trial shall, subject to all 
just exceptions, be evidence during the trial after remand. 
[411][23A . Remand in other cases— Where the Court from whose decree an appeal is preferred has 
disposed of the case otherwise than on a preliminary point, and the decree is reversed in appeal and a re­
trial is considered necessary, the Appellate Court shall have the same powers as it has under rule 23.] 
24 . Where evidence on record sufficient, Appellate Court may determine case finally— Where the evidence 
upon the record is sufficient to enable the Appellate Court to pronounce judgment, the Appellate Court may, 
after resettling the issues, if necessary, finally determine the suit, notwithstanding that the judgment of the 
148

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has proceeded wholly upon some ground other than that on 
which Appellate Court proceeds. 
25 . Where Appellate Court may frame issues and refer them for trial to Court whose decree appealed 
from— Where the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has omitted to frame or try any issue, or 
to determine any question of fact, which appears to the Appellate Court essential to the right decision of the 
suit upon the merits the Appellate Court may, if necessary, frame issues, and refer the same for trial to the 
Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, and in such case shall direct such Court to take the 
additional evidence required; 
and such Court shall proceed to try such issues, and shall return the evidence to the Appellate Court 
together with its findings thereon and the reasons therefor [412][within such time as may be fixed by the 
Appellate Court or extended by it from time to time.] 
26 . Finding and evidence to be put on record. Objections to finding— (1) Such evidence and findings shall 
form part of the record in the suit; and either party may within a time to be fixed by the Appellate Court, 
present a memorandum of objections to any finding. 
(2) Determination of appeal—After the expiration of the period so fixed for presenting such memorandum the 
Appellate Court shall proceed to determine the appeal. 
[413][26A . Order of remand to mention date of next hearing— Where the Appellate Court remands a case 
under rule 23 or rule 23A, or frames issues and refers them for trial under rule 25, it shall fix a date for the 
appearance of the parties before the Court from whose decree the appeal was preferred for the purpose of 
receiving the directions of that Court as to further proceedings in the suit.] 
27 . Production of additional evidence in Appellate Court— (1) The parties to an appeal shall not be entitled 
to produce additional evidence, whether oral or documentary, in the Appellate Court, But if— 
(a) the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has refused to admit evidence which ought to have 
been admitted, or 
[414] [(aa) the party seeking to produce additional evidence, establishes that notwithstanding the exercise of 
due diligence, such evidence was not within his knowledge or could not, after the exercise of due diligence, 
be produced by him at the time when the decree appealed against was passed, or] 
(b) the Appellate Court requires any document to be produced or any witness to be examined to enable it to 
pronounce judgment, or for any other substantial cause, 
the Appellate Court may allow such evidence or document to be produced, or witness to be examined. 
(2) Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced by an Appellate Court, the Court shall record the 
reason for its admission. 
28 . Mode of taking additional evidence— Wherever additional evidence is allowed to be produced, the 
Appellate Court may either take such evidence or direct the Court from whose decree the appeal is 
preferred, or any other subordinate Court, to take such evidence and to send it when taken to the Appellate 
Court. 
29 . Points to be defined and recorded— Where additional evidence is directed or allowed to be taken, the 
Appellate Court shall specify the points to which the evidence is to be confined and record on its proceedings 
the points so specified. 
Judgment in appeal 
30 . Judgment when and where pronounced— [415][(1)] The Appellate Court, after hearing the parties or 
their pleaders and referring to any part of the proceedings, whether on appeal or in the Court from whose 
decree the appeal is preferred, to which reference may be considered necessary, shall pronounce judgment 
open Court, either at once or on some future day of which notice shall be given to the parties or their 
pleaders. 
[416] [(2) Where a written judgment is to be pronounced, it shall be sufficient if the points for determination, 
the decision thereon and the final order passed in the appeal are read out and it shall not be necessary for 
the Court to read out the whole judgment, but a copy of the whole judgment shall be made available for the 
perusal of the parties or their pleaders immediately after the judgment in pronounced.] 
149

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31 . Contents, date and signature of judgment— The judgment of the Appellate Court shall be in writing and 
shall state— 
(a) the points for determination; 
(b) the decision thereon; 
(c) the reasons for the decision; and 
(d) where the decree appealed from is reversed or varied, the relief to which the appellant is entitled, and 
shall at the time that it is pronounced be signed and dated by the Judge or by the Judges concurring therein. 
32 . What judgment may direct— The judgment may be for confirming, varying or reversing the decree from 
which the appeal is preferred, or, if the parties to the appeal agree as to the form which the decree in appeal 
shall take, or as to the order to be made in appeal, the Appellate Court may pass a decree or make an order 
accordingly. 
33 . Power of Court of Appeal— The Appellate Court shall have power to pass any decree and make any 
order which ought to have been passed or made and to pass or make such further or other decree or order 
as the case may require, and this power may be exercised by the Court notwithstandng that the appeal is as 
to part only of the decree and may be exercised in favour of all or any of the respondents or parties, although 
such respondents or parties may not have filed any appeal or objection [417][and may, where there have 
been decrees in cross-suits or where two or more decrees are passed in one suit, be exercised in respect of 
all or any of the decrees, although an appeal may not have been filed against such decrees]: 
[418] [Provided that the Appellate Court shall not make any order under section 35A, in pursuance of any 
objection on which the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred has omitted or refused to made such 
order.] 
Illustration 
A claims a sum of money as due to him from X or Y, and in a suit against both obtains a decree against X. X, 
appeals, and A and Y are respondents. The Appellate Court decides in favour of X. If has power to pass a 
decree against Y. 
34 . Dessent to be recorded— Where the appeal is heard by more judges that one, any judge dissenting 
from the judgment of the court shall state in writing the decision or order which he thinks should be passed 
on the appeal, and he may state his reasons for the same. 
Decree in appeal 
35 . Date and contents of decree— (1) The decree of the Appellate Court shall bear date the day of which 
the judgment was pronounced. 
(2) The decree shall contain the number of the appeal, the names and descriptions of the appellant and 
respondent, and a clear specification of the relief granted or other adjudication made. 
(3) The decree shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the appeal, and by whom, or out of what 
property, and in what proportions such costs and the costs in the suit are to be paid. 
(4) The decree shall be signed and dated by the Judge or Judges who passed it: 
Judge dissenting from judgment need not sign decree—Provided that where there are more Judges than one 
and there is a difference of opinion among them, it shall not be necessary for any Judge dissenting from the 
judgment of the Court to sign the decree. 
36 . Copies of judgment and decree to be furnished to parties— Certified copies of the judment and decree 
in appeal shall be furnished to the parties on application to the Appellate Court and at their expense. 
37 . Certified copy of decree to be sent to Court whose decree appealed from— A copy of the judgment and 
of the decree, certified by the Appellate Court or such officer as it appoints in this behalf, shall be sent to the 
Court which passed the decree appealed from and shall be filed with the original proceedings in the suit, and 
an entry of the judgment of the Appellate Court shall be made in the register of civil suits. 
ORDER XLII-APPEALS FROM APPELLATE DECREES 
150

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 . Procedure— The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may be, to appeals from appellate decrees. 
[419][2 . Power of Court to direct that the appeal be heard on the question formulated by it— At the time of 
making an order under rule 11 or Order XLI for the hearing of a second appeal, the Court shall formulate the 
substantial question of law as required by section 100 and in doing so, the Court may direct that the second 
appeal be heard on the question so formulated and it shall not be open to the appelant to urge any other 
ground in the appeal without the leave of the Court, given in accordance with the provision of section 100. 
3 . Application of rule 14 of Order XLI— Reference in sub-rule (4) of rule 14 of Order XLI to the Court of first 
instance shall, in the case of an appeal from an appellate decree or order, be construed as a reference to the 
Court to which the appeal was preferred from the original decree or order.] 
ORDER XLIII-APPEALS FROM ORDERS 
1 . Appeal from orders— An appeal shall lie from the following orders under the provisions of section 104, 
namely:— 
(a) an order under rule 10 of Order VII returning a plaint to be presented to the proper Court [420][except 
where the procedure specified in rule 10A of Order VII has been followed]; 
[421]***** 
(c) an order under rule 9 of Order IX rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an order to set 
aside the dismissal of a suit; 
(d) an order under rule 13 of Order IX rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an order to set 
aside a decree passed ex parte 
[422]***** 
(f) an order under rule 21 of Order XI; 
[423]***** 
(i) an order under rule 34 of Order XXI on an objection to the draft of a document or of an endorsement; 
(j) an order under rule 72 or rule 92 of Order XXI setting aside or refusing to set aside a sale; 
[424] [(ja) an order rejecting an application made under sub-rule (1) of rule 106 of Order XXI, provided that 
an order on the original application, that is to say, the application referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 105 of that 
Order is appealable.] 
(k) an order under rule 9 of Order XXII refusing to set aside the abatement or dismissal of a suit; 
(l) an order under rule 10 of Order XXII giving or refusing to give leave; 
[425]***** 
(n) an order under rule 2 of Order XXV rejecting an application (in a case open to appeal) for an order to set 
aside the dismissal of a suit; 
[426] [(na) an order under rule 5 or rule 7 of Order XXXIII rejecting an application for permission to sue as an 
indigent persons:] 
[427]***** 
(p) orders in interpleader-suits under rule, rule 4 or rule 6 or Order XXXV; 
(q) an order under rule 2, rule 3 or rule 6 of Order XXXVIII; 
(r) an order under rule 1, rule 2 [428][rule 2A], rule 4 or rule 10 of Order XXXIX; 
(s) an order under rule 1 or rule 4 of Order XL; 
(t) an order of refusal under rule 19 of Order XLI to re-admit, or under rule 21 of Order XLI to re-hear, an 
appeal; 
151

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(u) an order rule 23 [429][or rule 23A] of Order XLI remanding a case, where an appeal would lie from the 
decree of the Appellate Court; 
[430]***** 
(w) an order under rule 4 of Order XLVII granting an application for review. 
[431][1A . Right to challenge non-appealable orders in appeal against decree— (1) Where any order is made 
under this Code against a party and there upon any judgment is pronounced against such party and a 
decree is drawn up, such party may, in an appeal against the decree, contend that such order should not 
have been made and the judgment should not have been pronounced. 
(2) In an appeal against a decree passed in a suit after recording a compromise or refusing to record a 
compromise, it shall be open to the appellant to contest the decree on the ground that the compromise 
should, or should not, have been recorded.] 
2 . Procedure— The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may be, to appeals from orders. 
ORDER XLIV-[432][APPEALS BY INDIGENT PERSONS] 
1 . Who may appeal [433][as an indigent person]— (1) Any person entitled to prefer an appeal, who is unable 
to pay the fee required for the memorandum of appeal, may present an application accompanied by a 
memorandum of appeal, and may be allowed to appeal as an [434][indigent person], subject, in all matters, 
including the presentation of such application, to the provisions relating to suits by [435][indigent person], in 
so far as those provisions are applicable. 
Proviso omitted by Act No. 66 of 1956, s. 14. 
[436]* * * * * 
[437][2 . Grant of time for payment of court-fee— Where an application is rejected under rule 1, the Court 
may, while rejecting the application, allow the applicant to pay the requisite Court-fee, within such time as 
may be fixed by the Court or extended by it from time to time; and upon such payment, the memorandum of 
appeal in respect of which such fee is payable shall have the same force and effect as if such fee has been 
paid in the first instance. 
3 . Inquiry as to whether applicant is an indigent person— (1) Where an applicant, referred to in rule 1, was 
allowed to sue or appeal as an indigent person in the Court from whose decree the appeal is preferred, no 
further inquiry in respect of the question whether or not he is an indigent person shall be necessary if the 
applicant has made an affidavit stating that he has not ceased to be an indigent person since the date of the 
decree appealed from; but if the Government pleader or the respondent disputes the truth of the statement 
made in such affidavit, an inquiry into the question aforesaid shall be held by the Appellate Court, or, under 
the orders of the Appellate Court, by an officer of the Court. 
(2) Where the applicant, referred to in rule 11, is alleged to have become an indigent person since the date 
of the decree appealed from, the inquiry into the question whether or not he is an indigent person shall be 
made by the Appellate Court or, under the orders of the Appellate Court, by an officer of that Court unless 
the Appellate Court considers it necessary in the circumstances of the case that the inquiry should be held 
by the Court from whose decision the appeal is preferred.] 
ORDER XLV- APPEALS TO THE SUPREME COURT 
1 . "Decree" defined— In this Order, unless there is something repugnant in the subject or context, the 
expression "decree" shall include a final order. 
2 . Application to Court whose complained of— [438][(1)] Whoever desires to appeal the Supreme Court 
shall apply by petition to the Court whose decree is complained of. 
[439] [(2) Every petition under sub-rule (1) shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall 
be made to conclude the disposal of the petition within sixty days from the date on which the petition is 
presented to the Court under sub-rule (1).] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
152

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Uttar Pradesh.— In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh, in rule 2 after sub-rule (2) the following sub-
rule be inserted, namely:— 
"(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), whoever desires to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
may apply orally to the Court whose decree is to be complained of, immediately before or after the 
pronouncement of the judgment by the Court, for a certificate contemplated in sub-rule (1) of rule 3, and the 
Court may either grant or refuse the certificate, or direct the applicant to file petition as required by sub-rule 
(1): 
Provided that if an oral application is entertained and rejected, no written petition under sub-rule (1) shall lie." 
[U.P. Act 57 of 1976]. 
3 . Certificate as to value or fitness—[440][(1) Every petition shall state the grounds of appeal and pray for a 
certificate— 
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance, and 
(ii) that in the opinion of the Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.] 
(2) Upon receipt of such petition, the Court shall direct notice to be served on the opposite party to show 
cause why the said certificate should not be granted. 
4 . [Consolidation of suits.] Rep. by the Code of civil Procedure (Amendment) Act,1973 (49 of 1973) s. 4 
(w.e.f. 1-2- 1977). 
5 . [Remission of dispute to Court of first instance.] Rep. by s. 4, ibid, (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
6 . Effect of refusal of certificate— Where such certificate is refused, the petition shall be dismissed. 
7 . Security and deposit required on grant of certificate— (1) Where the certificate is granted, the applicant 
shall, within ninety days or such further period, not exceeding sixty days, as the Court may upon cause 
shown allow; from the date of the decree complained of, or within six weeks from the date of the grant of the 
certificate whichever is the later date,— 
(a) furnish security in cash or in Government securities for the costs of the respondent, and 
(b) deposit the amount required to defray the expense of translating, transcribing indexing printing, and 
transmitting to the Supreme Court a correct copy of the whole record of the suit, except— 
(1) formal documents directed to be excluded by any Rule of the Supreme Court in force for the time being; 
(2) papers which the parties agree to exclude; 
(3) accounts, or portions of accounts, which the officer empowered by the Court for that purpose considers 
unnecessary, and which the parties have not specifically asked to be included; and 
(4) such other documents as the High Court may direct to be excluded: 
Provided that the Court at the time of granting the certificate may, after hearing any opposite party who 
appears, order on the ground of special hardship that some other form of security may be furnished: 
Provided further, that no adjournment shall be granted to an opposite party to contest the nature of such 
security. 
8 . Admission of appeal and procedure thereon— Where such security has been furnished and deposit made 
to the satisfaction of the Court, the Court shall— 
(a) declare the appeal admitted, 
(b) give notice thereof to the respondent, 
(c) transmit to the Supreme Court under the seal of the Court a correct copy of the said record, except as 
aforesaid, and 
(d) give to either party one or more authenticated copies of any of the papers in the suit on his applying 
therefore and paying the reasonable expenses incurred in preparing them. 
153

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
9 . Revocation of acceptance of security— At any time before the admission of the appeal the Court may, 
upon cause shown, revoke the acceptance of any such security, and make further directions thereon. 
9A . Power to dispense with notices in case of deceased parties— Nothing in these rules requiring any notice 
to be served on or given to an opposite party or respondent shall be deemed to require any notice to be 
served on or given to the legal representative of any deceased opposite party or deceased respondent in a 
case, where such opposite party or respondent did not appear either at the hearing in the Court whose 
decree is complained of or at any proceedings subsequent to the decree of that Court: 
Provided that notices under sub-rule (2) of rule 3 and under rule 8 shall be given by affixing the same in 
some conspicuous place in the court-house of the Judge of the district in which the suit was originally 
brought, and by publication in such newspapers as the Court may direct. 
10 . Power to order further security or payment— Where at any time after the admission of an appeal but 
before the transmission of the copy of the record, except as aforesaid, to the Supreme Court such security 
appears inadequate, 
or further payment is required for the purpose of translating, transcribing, printing, indexing or transmitting 
the copy of the record, except as aforesaid, 
the Court may order the appellant to furnish, within a time to be fixed by the Court, other and sufficient 
security, or to make, within except as aforesaid. 
11 . Effect of failure to comply with order— Where the appellant fails to comply with such order, the 
proceedings shall be stayed, 
and the appeal shall not proceed without an order in this behalf of the Supreme Court 
and in the meantime execution of the decree appealed from shall not be stayed. 
12 . Refund of balance deposit— When the copy of the record, except as aforesaid, has been transmitted to 
the Supreme Court, the appellant may obtain a refund of the balance (if any) of the amount which he had 
deposited under rule 7. 
13 . Powers of Court pending appeal— (1) Notwithstanding the grant of a certificate for the admission of any 
appeal, the decree appealed from shall be unconditionally executed, unless the Court otherwise directs. 
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, on special cause shown by any party interested in the suit, or otherwise 
appearing to the court,— 
(a) impound any movable property in dispute or any part thereof, or 
(b) allow the decree appealed from to be executed, taking such security from the respondent as the Court 
thinks fit for the due performance of any order which the Supreme Court may make on the appeal, or 
(c) stay the execution of the decree appealed from, taking such security from the appellant as the Court 
thinks fit for the due performance of the decree appealed from, or of any decree or order which the Supreme 
Court may make on the appeal, or 
(d) place any party seeking the assistance of the Court under such conditions or give such other direction 
respecting the subject-matter of the appeal, as it thinks fit, by the appointment of a receiver or otherwise. 
14 . Increase of security found inadequate— (1) Where at any time during the pendency of the appeal the 
security furnished by either party appears inadequate, the Court may, on the application of the other party, 
require further security. 
(2) In default of such further security being furnished as required by the Court,— 
(a) if the original security was furnished by the appellant, the Court may, on the application of the 
respondent, execute the decree, appealed from as if the appellant had furnished no such security; 
(b) if the original security was furnished by the respondent, the Court shall, so far as may be practicable stay 
the further execution of the decree, and restore the parties to the position in which they respectively were 
when the security which appears inadequate was furnished, or give such direction respectiong the subject-
matter of the appeal as it thinks fit. 
154

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 . Procedure to enforce orders of the Supreme Court— (1) Whoever desires to obtain execution of any 
decree or order of the Supreme Court shall apply by petition, accompanied by a certified copy of the decree 
passed or order made in appeal and sought to be executed, to the Court from which the appeal to the 
Supreme Courts, was preferred. 
(2) Such Court shall transmit the decree or order of the Supreme Court to the Court which passed the first 
decree appealed from, or to such other Court as the Supreme Court by such decree or order may direct and 
shall (upon the application of either party) give such directions as may be required for the execution of the 
same; and the Court to which the said decree or order is so transmitted shall execute it accordingly, in the 
manner and according to the provisions applicable to the execution of its original decrees. 
(4) Unless the Supreme Court otherwise directs, no decree or order of that Court shall be inoperative on the 
ground that no notice has been served on or given to the legal representative of any deceased opposite 
party or deceased respondent in a case, where such opposite party or respondent did not appear either at 
the hearing in the Court whose decree was complained of or at any proceedings subsequent to the decree of 
that Court, but such order shall have the same force and effect as if it had been made before the death took 
place. 
16 . Appeal from order relating to execution— The orders made by the Court which executes the decree or 
order of the Supreme Court, relating to such execution, shall be appealable in the same manner and subject 
to the same rules as the orders of such Court relating to the execution of its own decrees. 
17. [Appeals to Federal Court]. Rep. by the Federal Court, 1941 (21 of 1941), s. 2 
ORDER XLVI-REFERENCE 
1 . Reference of question to High Court— Where, before or on the hearing of a suit or an appeal in which the 
decree is not subject to appeal, or where, in the execution of any such decree, any question of law or usage 
having the force of law arises, on which the Court trying the suit or appeal, or executing the decree, 
entertains reasonable doubt, the Court may, either of its own motion or on the application of any of the 
parties, draw up a statement of the facts of the case and the point on which doubt is entertained, and refer 
such statement with its own opinion on the point for the decision of the High Court. 
2 . Court may pass decree contingent upon decision of High Court— The Court may either stay the 
proceedings or proceed in the case notwithstanding such reference, and may pass a decree or make an 
order contingent upon the decision of the High Court on the point referred; 
But no decree or order shall be executed in any case in which such reference is made until the receipt of a 
copy of the judgment of the High Court upon the reference. 
3 . Judgment of High Court to be transmitted and case disposed of accordingly— The High Court, after 
hearing the parties if they appear and desire to be heard, shall decide the point so referred, and shall 
transmit a copy of its judgment, under the signature of the Registrar, to the Court by which the reference was 
made; and such Court shall, on the receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with the 
decision of the High Court. 
4 . Costs of reference to High Court— The costs (is any) consequent on a reference for the decision of the 
High Court shall be costs in the case. 
4A . Reference to high Court under proviso to section 113— The provisions of rules 2, 3 and 4 shall apply to 
any reference by the Court under the proviso to section 113 as they apply to a reference under rule 1. 
5 . Power to alter, etc., decree of Court making reference— Where a case is referred to the High Court under 
rule 1 or under the proviso to section 113, the High Court may return the case for amendment, and may alter, 
cancel or set aside any decree or order which the Court making the reference has passed or made in the 
case out of which the reference arose, and make such order as it thinks fit. 
6 . Power to refer to High Court questions as to jurisdiction in small causes— (1) Where at any time before 
judgment a Court in which a suit has been instituted doubts whether the suit is cognizable by a Court of 
Small Causes or is not so cognizable, it may submit the record to the High Court with a statement of its 
reasons for the doubt as to the nature of the suit. 
155

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) On receiving the record and statement, the High Court may order the Court either to proceed with the suit 
or to return the plaint for presentation to such other Court as it may in its order declare to be competent to 
take cognizance of the suit. 
7 . Power to District Court to submit for revision proceeding had under mistake as to jurisdiction in small 
causes— (1) Where it appears to a District Court that a Court subordinate thereto has, by reason of 
erroneously holding a suit to be cognizable by a Court of small Causes or not to be so cognizable, failed to 
exercise a jurisdiction vested in it by law, or exercised a jurisdiction not so vested, the District Court may, and 
if required by a party shall, submit the record to the High Court with a statement of its reasons for considering 
the opinion of the subordinate Court with respect to the nature of the suit to be erroneous. 
(2) On receiving the record and statement the High Court may make such order in the case as it thinks fit. 
(3) With respect to any proceeding subsequent to decree in any case submitted to the High Court under this 
rule, the High Court may make such order as in the circumstance appears to it to be just and proper. 
(4) A Court subordinate to a District Court shall comply with any requisition which the District Court may 
make for any record or information for the purposes of this rule. 
ORDER XLVII- REVIEW 
1 . Application for review of judgment— (1) Any person considering himself aggrieved— 
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has been preferred, 
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or 
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, 
and who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due 
diligence was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree was 
passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record of for any 
other sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may 
apply for a review of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order. 
(2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or order may apply for a review of judgment notwithstanding 
the pendency of an appeal by some other party except where the ground of such appeal is common to the 
applicant and the appellant, or when, being respondent, he can present to the Appellate Court the case on 
which he applies for the review. 
[441] [Explanation—The fact that the decision on a question of law on which the judgment of the Court is 
based has been reversed or modified by the subsequent decision of a superior Court in any other case, shall 
not be a ground for the review of such judgment.] 
2 . [To whom applications for review may be made.] Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 
1956 (66 of 1956), s. 14. 
3 . Form of applications for review— The provisions as to the form of preferring appeals shall apply mutatis 
mutandis, to applications for review. 
4 . Application where rejected— (1) Where it appear to the Court that there is not sufficient ground for a 
review, it shall reject the application. 
(2) Application where granted—Where the Court is of opinion that the application for review should be 
granted, it shall grant the same: 
Provided that— 
(a) no such application shall be granted without previous notice to the opposite party, to enable him to 
appear and be heard in support of the decree or order, a review of which is applied for; and 
(b) no such application shall be granted on the ground of discovery of new matter or evidence which the 
applicant alleges was not within his knowledge, or could not be adduced by him when the decree or order 
was passed or made, without strict proof of such allegation. 
156

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
5 . Application for review in Court consisting of two or more judges— Where the Judge or Judges, or any one 
of the judges, who passed the decree or made the order a review of which is applied for, continues or 
continued attached to the Court at the time when the application for a review is presented, and is not or not 
precluded by absence or other cause for a period of six months next after the application from considering 
the decree or order to which the application refers, such Judge or Judges or any of them shall hear the 
application, and no other Judge or Judges of the Court shall hear the same. 
6 . Application where rejected— (1) Where the application for a review is heard by more than one judge and 
the Court is equally divided, the application shall be rejected. 
(2) Where there is a majority, the decision shall be according to the opinion of the majority. 
7 . Order of rejection not appealable. Objections to order granting application— [442][(1) An order of the 
Court rejecting the application shall not be appealable; but an order granting an application may be objected 
to at once by an appeal from the order granting the application or in an appeal from the decree or order 
finally passed or made in the suit.] 
(2) Where the application has been rejected in consequence of the failure of the applicant to appear, he my 
apply for an order to have the rejected application restored to the file, and, where it is proved to the 
satisfaction of the Court that he was prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when such application 
was called on for hearing, the Court shall order it to be restored to the file upon such terms as to costs or 
otherwise as it thinks fit, and shall appoint a day for hearing the same. 
(3) No order shall be made under sub-rule (2) unless notice of the application has been served on the 
opposite party. 
8 . Registry of application granted, and order for re-hearing— When an application for review is granted, a 
note thereof shall be made in the register and the Court may at once re-hear the case or make such order in 
regard to the re-hearing as it thinks fit. 
9 . Bar of certain application— No application to review an order made on an application for a review or a 
decree or order passed or made on a review shall be entertained. 
ORDER XLVIII-MISCELLANEOUS 
1 . Process to be served at expense of party issuing— (1) Every process issued under this Code shall be 
served at the expense of the party on whose behalf it is issued, unless the Court otherwise directs. 
(2) Costs of service—The court-fee chargeable for such service shall be paid within a time to be fixed before 
the process is issued. 
2 . Orders and notices how served— All orders, notices and other documents required by this Code to be 
given to or served on any person shall be served in the manner provided for the service of summons. 
3 . Use of forms in appendices.— The forms given in the appendices, with such variation as the 
circumstances or each case may require, shall be used for the purpose therein mentioned. 
ORDER XLIX-CHARTERED HIGH COURTS 
1 . Who may serve processes of High Court— Notice to produce documents, summonses to witnesses, and 
every other judicial process, issued in the exercise of the original civil jurisdiction of the High Court, and of its 
matrimonial, testamentary and intestate jurisdictions, except summonses to defendants, writs of execution 
and notices to respondents may be served by the attorneys in the suits, or by persons employed by them, or 
by such other persons as the High Court, by any rule or order, directs. 
2 . Saving in respect of Chartered High Courts— Nothing in this Schedule shall be deemed to limit or 
otherwise affect any rules in force at the commencement of this Code for the the taking of evidence or the 
recording of judgments and orders by a Chartered High Court. 
3 . Application of rules— The following rules shall not apply to any Chartered High Court in the exercise of its 
ordinary or extraordinary original civil jurisdiction, namely:— 
(1) rule 10 and rule 11, clauses (b) and (c), of Order VII; 
(2) rule 3 of order X; 
157

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) rule 2 of Order XVI; 
(4) rules 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16 (so far as relates to the manner of taking evidence) of Order 
XVIII; 
(5) rules 1 to 8 of Order XX; and 
(6) rule 7 of Order XXXIII (so far as relates to the making of a memorandum); 
and rule 35 of Order XLI shall not apply to any such High Court in the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction. 
Order L 
PROVINCIAL SMALL CAUSE COURTS 
1 . Provincial Small Cause Courts— The provisions hereinafter specified shall not extend to Courts 
constituted under the Provincial Small Cause Courts Act, 1887 (9 of 1887) or under the Berar Small Cause 
Courts Law, 1905 or to Courts exercising the jurisdiction of a Court of Small Causes under the said Act or 
Law or to Courts in any part of India to which the said Act does not extend exercising a corresponding 
jurisdiction that is to say— 
(a) so much of this Schedule as relates to— 
(i) suits excepted from the cognizance of a Court of Small Causes or the execution of decrees in such suits; 
(ii) the execution of decrees against immovable property or the interest of a partner in partnership property; 
(iii) the settlement of issues; and 
(b) the following rules and orders:— 
Order II, rule 1 (frame of suit); 
Order X, rule 3 (record of examination of parties); 
Order XV, except so much of rule 4 as provides for the pronouncement at once of judgment; 
Order XVIII, rules 5 to 12 (evidence); 
Orders XLI to XLV (appeals); 
Order XLVII, rules 2, 3, 5, 6, 7 (review); 
Order LI. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Uttar Pradesh.— In its application to the State of Uttar Pradesh in rule 1, in clause (b) after the words 
"provides for pronouncement at once of judgment" add "and rule 5". 
[U.P. Act 30 of 1974]. 
ORDER LI- PRESIDENCY SMALL CAUSE COURTS 
1 . Presidency Small Cause Courts— Save as provided in rules 22 and 23 of Order V, rules 4 and 7 of Order 
XXI, and rule 4 of Order XXVI, and by the Presidency Small Cause Courts Act, 1882 (15 of 1882), this 
Schedule shall not extend to any suit or proceeding in any Court of Small Causes established in the towns of 
Calcutta, Madras and Bombay. 
APPENDIX A 
PLEADINGS 
(1) TITLES OF SUITS 
In the Court of 
A.B. (add description and residence) Plaintiff 
158

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
                 
 
                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
        
      
          
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                 
 
          
              
  
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
      
          
                
          
against 
C.D. (add descritption and residence) Defendant 
(2) DESCRIPTION OF PARTIES IN PARTICULAR CASES 
[The Union of Inida or the State of , as the case may be.] 
The Advocate General of 
The Collector of 
The State of 
The A.B. Company, Limited having its registered office at 
A.B., a public officer of the C.D. Company. 
A.B. (add description and residence), on behalf of himself and all other creditors of C.D., 
late of (add description and residence). 
A.B. (add description and residence), on behalf of himself and all other holders of debentures issued by the 
Company Limited 
The Official Receiver 
A.B., a minor (add description and residence), by C.D. [or by the Court of Wards], his next friend. 
A.B. (add description and residence), a person of unsound mind [or of weak mind], by C.D. his next friend 
A.B., a firm carrying on business in partnership at 
A.B. (add description and residence), by his constituted attorney C.D. (add description and residence) 
A.B. (add description and residence), shebait of Thakur 
A.B. (add description and residence), executor of C.D., deceased. 
A.B. (add description and residence), heir of C.D., deceased. 
(3) PLAINTS 
No. 1 
Money Lent 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows : 
1. On the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of 19 . . . . . . ., . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . he lent the defendant rupees repayable 
on the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
2. The defendant has not paid the same, except . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .rupees paid on the . . . . . . . day of . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . .19 . . . . . . . . 
[If the plaintiff claims exemption from any law of limitation, say :] 
3. The plaintiff was a minor [or insane] from the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of till . . . . . . . . . the . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. . .day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
4. [Facts showing when the cause of action arose and that the Court has jurisdiction.] 
5. The value of the subject-matter of the suit for the purpose of jurisdiction is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .rupees and 
for the prupose of court-fees is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .rupees. 
6. The plaintiff claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .rupees, with interest at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .per cent. from the . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . .day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .19 . . . . . . . . 
159

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
        
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No. 2 
Money Overpaid 
(Title) 
A.B., the above named plaintiff, states as follows :— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of. . . . 19. . . the plaintiff agreed to buy and the defendant agreed to sell . . . . bars of 
silver at. . . . annas per tola of fine silver. 
2. The plaintiff procured the said bars to be assayed by E.F., who was paid by the defendant for such assay, 
and E.F. declared each of the bars to contain 1,500 tolas of fine silver, and the plaintiff accordingly paid the 
defendant. . . rupees. 
3. Each of the said bars contained only 1,200 tolas of fine silver, of which fact the plaintiff was ignorant when 
he made the payment. 
4. The defendant has not repaid the sum so overpaid. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 3 
Goods Sold at a Fixed Price and Delivered 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff states as follows :— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . .19. . . . . ., E.F. sold and delivered to the defendant [one hundred barrels 
of flour, or the goods mentioned in the schedule hereto annexed, or sundry goods.] 
2. The defendant promised to pay . . . . . . rupees for the said goods on delivery [or or the . . . . . . day of . . . . 
. . , some day before the plaint was filed]. 
3. He has not paid the same. 
4. E.F. died on the . . . . . . day of 19. . . . . By his last will he appointed his brother, the plaintiff his executor. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
7. The plaintiff as executor of E.F. claims [Relief Claimed]. 
No. 4 
Goods Sold at a Reasonable Price and Delivered 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . 19. . . , plaintiff sold and delivered to the defendant [sundry articles of house-
furniture], but no express agreement was made as to the price. 
2. The goods were reasonably worth . . . . rupees. 
3. The defendant has not paid the money. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed.] 
No. 5 
Goods Made at Dependent's Request, and not Accepted 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:­
160

 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
       
 
   
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
     
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , E.F. agreed with the plaintiff that the plaintiff should make for him [six 
tables and fifty chairs] and that E.F. should pay for the goods on delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . rupees. 
2. The plaintiff made the goods, and on the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , offered to deliver them to E.F., and 
has ever since been ready and willing so to do. 
3. E.F. has not accepted the goods or paid for them. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 6 
Deficiency Upon a Re-sale [Goods Sold at Auction] 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . ., the plaintiff put up at auction sundry [goods], subject to the condition 
that all goods not paid for and removed by the purchaser within [ten days] after the sale should be re-sold by 
auction on his account, of which condition the defendant had notice. 
2. The defendant purchased [one crate of crockery] at the auction at the price of . . . . . . rupees. 
3. The plaintiff was ready and willing to deliver the goods to the defendant on the date of the sale and for [ten 
days] after. 
4. The defendant did not take away the goods purchased by him, nor pay for them within [ten days] after the 
sale, nor afterwards. 
5. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . ., the plaintiff re-sold the [crate of crockery], on account of the 
defendant, by public auction, for . . . . rupees. 
6. The expenses attendant upon such re-sale amounted to . . . . . . rupees. 
7. The defendant has not paid the deficiency thus arising, amounting to rupees. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 7 
Services at a Reasonable Rate 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. Between the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , and the . . . . . . day of 19. . . at . . . . . . , plaintiff [executed 
sundry drawings, designs and diagrams] for the defendant, at his request; but no express agreement was 
made as to the sum to be paid for such services. 
2. The services were reasonably worth . . . . . . rupees. 
3. The defendant has not paid the money. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 8 
Services and Materials at a Reasonable Cost 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19 . . . , at . . . ., the plaintiff built a house [known as No. . . . ., in. . . .], and 
furnished the materials therefor, for the defendant, at his request, but no express agreement was made as to 
the amount to be paid for such work and materials. 
161

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
   
     
 
 
       
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
      
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. The work done and materials supplied were reasonably worth . . . . . . rupees. 
3. The defendant has not paid the money. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.]. 
No. 9 
Use and Occupation 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, executor of the will of X. Y., deceased, states as follows:­
1. That the defendant occupied the [house No. . . .., street], by permission of the said X. Y., from the . . . . . . 
day of. . . 19 . . . , until the day of . . . . . . 19 . . . , and no agreement was made as to payment for the use of 
the said premises. 
2. That the use of the said premises for the said period was reasonably worth . . . rupees. 
3. The defendant has not paid the money. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
4. The plaintiff as executor of X. Y., claims (Relief claimed]. 
No. 10 
On an Award 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named, plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19 . . . , the plaintiff and defendant, having a difference between them 
concerning [a demand of the plaintiff for the price of ten barrels of oil which the defendant refused to pay]. 
agreed in writing to submit the difference to the arbitration of E.F. and G.H. and the original document is 
annexed hereto. 
2. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the arbitrators awarded that the defendant should [pay the plaintiff . . . 
rupees]. 
3. The defendant has not paid the money. 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 11 
On a Foreign Judgment 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , at . . . , in the State [or Kingdom] of the . . . . . . Court of that State [or 
Kingdom,] in a suit therein pending between the plaintiff and the defendant, duly adjudged that the defendant 
should pay to the plaintiff . . . . . . . . .rupees, with interest from the said date. 
2. The defendant has not paid the money. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 12 
Against Surety for Payment of Rent 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
162

 
 
 
       
      
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
  
            
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
    
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
                   
           
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. On the . . . . . . day . . . . . . 19. . . , E.F. hired from the plaintiff for the term of . . . . . . years, the [house No. . 
. . . . . , . . . . . . street], at the annual rent of . . . . . . rupees, payable [monthly]. 
2. The defendant agreed, in consideration of the letting of the premises to E.F. to guarantee the punctual 
payment of the rent. 
3. The rent for the month of . . . . . . 19. . . , amounting to . . . . . . rupees, has not been paid. 
[If, by the terms of the agreement, notice is required to be given to the surety, add:-] 
4. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff gave notice to the defendant of the non-payment of the 
rent, and demanded payment thereof. 
5. The defendant has not paid the same. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and relief claimed.] 
No. 13 
Breach of Agreement to Purchase Land 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, and the 
original document is hereto annexed. 
[Or, on the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the plaintiff should 
sell to the defendant and that the defendant should purchase from the plaintiff forty bighas of land in the 
village of. . . .for. . . rupees.] 
2. On the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . day of . . . . . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff, being then the absolute owner of the 
property [land the same being free from all incumbrances, as was made to appear to the defendant], 
tendered to the defendant a sufficient instrument of transfer of the same [or, was ready and willing, and is still 
ready and willing, and offered, to transfer the same to the defendant by a sufficient instrument] on the 
payment by the defendant of the sun agreed upon. 
3. The defendant has not paid the money. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.]. 
No. 14 
Not Delivering Goods Sold 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the defendant should 
deliver [one hundred barrels of flour] to the plaintiff on the. . . ..day of. . . 19. . . , and that the plaintiff should 
pay therefor . . . . . . rupees on delivery. 
2. On the [said] day the plaintiff was ready and willing, and offered, to pay the defendant the said sum upon 
delivery of the goods. 
3. The defendant has not delivered the goods, and the plaintiff has been deprived of the profits which would 
have accrued to him from such delivery. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 15 
Wrongful Dismissal 
(Title) 
163

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
       
       
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:­
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the plaintiff should 
serve the defendant as [an accountant, or in the capacity of foreman, or as the case may be], and that the 
defendant should employ the plaintiff as such for the term of [one year] and pay him for his services . . . . . . 
rupees [monthly]. 
2. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . . , the plaintiff entered upon the service of the defendant and has ever 
since been, and still is, ready and willing to continue in such service during the remainder of the said year 
whereof the defendant always has had notice. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant wrongfully discharged the plaintiff, and refused to 
o
permit him to serve as aforesaid, or to pay him for his services. 
[As in paras. 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 16 
Breach of Contract to Serve 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff and defendant mutually agreed that the plaintiff should 
employ the defendant at an [annual] salary of . . . rupees, and that the defendant should serve the plaintiff as 
[an artist] for the term of [one year]. 
2. The plaintiff has always been ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement and on the day of . . . . 
. . 19. . . , offered so to do. 
3. The defendant (entered upon) the service of the plaintiff on the above-mentioned day, but afterwards, on 
the. . . .day of. . . 19. . . , he refused to serve the plaintiff as aforesaid. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.]. 
No. 17 
Against a Builder for Defective Workmanship 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, and the 
original document is hereto annexed. [or State the tenor of the contract.] 
2. The plaintiff duly performed all the conditions of the agreement on his part.] 
3. The defendant [built the house referred to in the agreement in a bad and unworkmanlike manner]. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 18 
On a Bond for the Fidelity of a Clerk 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff took E.F. into his employment as a clerk. 
2. In consideration thereof, on the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant agreed with the plaintiff that if 
E.F., should not faithfully perform his duties as a clerk to the plaintiff, or should fail to account to the plaintiff 
for all monies, evidences of debt or other property received by him for the use of the plaintiff, the defendant 
would pay to the plaintiff whatever loss he might sustain by reason thereof, not exceeding . . . . . . . . . . . 
rupees. 
164

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
       
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Or, 2. In consideration thereof, the defendant by his bond of the same date bound himself to pay the plaintiff 
the penal sum of . . . . . . rupees, subject to the condition that if E.F. should faithfully perform his duties as 
clerk and cashier to the plaintiff and should justly account to the plaintiff for all monies, evidences of debt or 
other property which should be at any time held by him in trust for the plaintiff, the bond should be void.] 
[Or, 2 In consideration thereof, on the same date the defendant executed a bond in favour of the plaintiff, and 
the original document is hereto annexed.] 
3. Between the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , and the . . . . . . day of 19. . . , E.F. received money and other 
property, amounting to the value of . . . . . . rupees, for the use of the plaintiff, for which sum he has not 
accounted to him, and the same still remains due and unpaid. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 19 
By Tenant against Landlord, with Special Damage 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant, by a registered instrument, let to the plaintiff [the 
house No. . . . . . . Street] for the term of . . . . . . years, contracting with the plaintiff that he, the plaintiff, and 
his legal representatives should quietly enjoy possession thereof for the said term. 
2. All conditions were fulfilled and all things happened necessary to entitle the plaintiff to maintain this suit. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , during the said term, E.F., who was the lawful owner of the said 
house, lawfully evicted the plaintiff therefrom, and still withhold the possession thereof from him. 
4. The plaintiff was thereby [prevented from continuing the business of a tailor at the said place, was 
compelled to expend . . . . . . rupees in moving, and lost the custom of G.H. and I.J. by such removal]. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 20 
On an Agreement of Indemnity 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff and defendant, being partners in trade under the style of 
A.B, and C.D., dissolved the partnership, and mutually agreed that the defendant should take and keep all 
the partnership property, pay all debts of the firm and indemnify the plaintiff against all claims that might be 
made upon him on account of any indebtedness of the firm. 
2. The plaintiff duly performed all the conditions of the agreement on his part. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , [a judgment was recovered against the plaintiff and defendant by 
E.F., in the High Court of Judicature at . . . . . . , upon a debt due from the firm to E.F. and on the day of 19. . 
. ,] the plaintiff paid . . . . . . rupees [in satisfaction of the same]. 
4. The defendant has not paid the same to the plaintiff. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 21 
Procuring Property by Fraud 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
165

 
 
 
       
      
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
        
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
             
1. On the . . . . . . day . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant, for the purpose of inducing the plaintiff to sell him certain 
goods, represented to the plaintiff that [he, the defendant, was solvent, and worth . . . . . . . . . . rupees over 
all his liabilities]. 
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell [and deliver] to the defendant, [dry goods] of the value of . . . . . . . 
. . . rupees. 
3. The said representations were false [or state the particular falsehoods] and were then known by the 
defendant to be so. 
4. The defendant has not paid for the goods. [Or, if the goods were not delivered.] The plaintiff, in preparing 
and shipping the goods and procuring their restoration, expended. . . . . rupees. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 22 
Fraudulently Procuring Credit to be given to another Person 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant represented to the plaintiff that E.F., was solvent and in 
good credit, and worth . . . . . . rupees over all his liabilities [or that E.F. then held a responsible situation and 
was in good circumstances, and might safely be trusted with goods on credit]. 
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell to E.F. (rice) of the value of . . . . . . rupees [on months credit]. 
3. The said representations were false and were then known by the defendant to be so, and were made by 
him with intent to deceive and defraud the plaintiff [or to deceive and injure the plaintiff]. 
4. E.F. [did not pay for the said goods at the expiration of the credit aforesaid, [or] has not paid for the said 
rice, and the plaintiff has wholly lost the same. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 23 
Polluting the Water under the Plaintiff's Land 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The plaintiff is, and at all the time hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of certain land called . . . . . . . . . . 
and situate in . . . . . . and of a well therein, and of water in the well, and was entitled to the use and benefit of 
the well and of the water therein, and to have certain springs and streams of water which flowed and ran into 
the well to supply the same to flow or run without being fouled or polluted. 
2. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant wrongfully fouled and polluted and well and the water 
therein and the springs and streams of water which flowed into the well. 
3. In consequence the water in the well became impure and unfit for domestic and other necessary 
purposes, and the plaintiff and his family are deprived of the use and benefit of the well and water. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 24 
Carrying on a Noxious Manufacture 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of certain lands called . . . ., 
situate in . . . . . . . . . . . 
166

 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
      
       
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
         
 
 
        
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. Ever since the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant has wrongfully caused to issue from certain 
smelting works carried on by the defendant large quantities of offensive and unwholesome smoke and other 
vapours and noxious matter, which spread themselves over and upon the said lands, and corrupted the air, 
and settled on the surface of the lands. 
3. Thereby the trees, hedges, herbage and crops of the plaintiff growing on the lands were damaged and 
deteriorated in value, and the cattle and live-stock of the plaintiff on the lands became unhealthy, and many 
of them were poisoned and died. 
4. The plaintiff was unable to graze the lands with cattle and sheep as he otherwise might have done, and 
was obliged to remove his cattle, sheep and farming-stock therefrom, and has been prevented from having 
so beneficial and healthy a use and occupation of the lands as he otherwise would have had. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 25 
Obstructing a Right of Way 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The plaintiff is, and at the time hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of [a house in the village of . . . . . . ]. 
2. He was entitled to a right of way from the [house] over a certain field to a public highway and back again 
from the highway over the field to the house, for himself and his servants [with vehicles, or or foot] at all 
times of the year. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , defendant wrongfully obstructed the said way, so that the plaintiff 
could not pass [with vehicles, or or food, or in any manner] along the way [and has ever since wrongfully 
obstructed the same]. 
4. (State special damage, if any.) 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 26 
Obstructing a Highway 
(Title) 
1. The defendant wrongfully dug a trench and heaped up earth and stones in the public highway leading from 
. . . . . . to . . . . . . so as to obstruct it. 
2. Thereby the plaintiff, while lawfully passing along the said highway, fell over the said earth and stones, [or 
into the said trench] and broke his arm, and suffered great pain, and was prevented from attending to his 
business for a long time, and incurred expense for medical attendance. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 27 
Diverting a Water-course 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The plaintiff is, and at the time hereinafter mentioned was, possessed of a mill situated on a [stream] 
known as the . . . . . . , in the village of . . . . . . , district of . . . . . . . 
2. By reason of such possession the plaintiff was entitled to the flow of the stream for working the mill. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant, by cutting the bank of the stream, wrongfully divered 
the water thereof, so that less water ran into the plaintiff's mill. 
167

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
      
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
      
     
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
        
 
   
 
           
     
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. By reason thereof the plaintiff has been unable to grind more than sacks per day, whereas, before the said 
diversion of water, he was able to grind . . . . . . sacks per day. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 28 
Obstructing a Right to Use Water for Irrigation 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. Plaintiff is, and was at the time hereinafter mentioned, possessed of certain lands situate, etc., and entitled 
to take and use a portion of the water of a certain stream for irrigating the said lands. 
2. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant prevented the plaintiff from taking and using the said 
portion of the said water as aforesaid, by wrongfully obstructing and diverting the said stream. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 29 
Injuries Caused by Negligence on a Railroad 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows :— 
1. On the . . . . . . day . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendants were common carriers of passengers by railway 
between . . . . . . and . . . . . . 
2. On that day the plaintiff was a passenger in one of the carriages of the defendants on the said railway. 
3. While he was such passenger, at . . . . . . [or near the station of. . . . . . or . . . .. between the stations of. . . 
..and. . . .], a collision occurred on the said railway caused by the negligence and unskilfulness of the 
defendants' servants, whereby the plaintiff was much injured [having his leg broken, his head cut, etc., and 
state the special damage, if any, as], and incurred expense for medical attendance and is permanently 
disabled from carrying on his former business as [a salesman]. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
[Or thus:- 2. On that day the defendants by their servants so negligently and unskillfully drove and managed 
an engine and a train of carriages attached thereto upon and along the defendant's railway which the plaintiff 
was then lawfully crossing, that the said engine and train were driven and struck against the plaintiff, 
whereby, etc., as in para 3.] 
No. 30 
Injuries Caused by Negligent Driving 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The plaintiff is a shoemaker, carrying on business at . . . . . . . The defendant is a merchant of. . . . . . . . . . . 
. . .. . . 
2. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff was walking southward along Chowringhee, in the City of 
Calcutta, at about 3 o'clock in the afternoon. He was obliged to cross Middleton Street, which is a street 
running into Chowringhee at right angles. While he was crossing this street, and just before he could reach 
the foot pavement on the further side thereof, a carriage of the defendant's, drawn by two horses under the 
charge and control of the defendant's servants, was negligently, suddenly and without any warning turned at 
a rapid and dangerous pace out of Middleton Street into Chowringhee. The pole of the carriage struck the 
plaintiff and knocked him down, and he was much trampled by the horses. 
168

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
        
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. By the blow and fall and trampling the plaintiff's left arm was broken and he was bruised and injured on the 
side and back, as well as internally, and in consequence thereof the plaintiff was for four months ill and in 
suffering and unable to attend to his business, and incurred heavy medical and other expenses, and 
sustained great loss of business and profits. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 31 
For Malicious Prosecution 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . . .day of . . . . . . . .19. . . , the defendant obtained a warrant of arrest from . . . . . . . . . . [a 
magistrate of the said city, or as the case may be] on a charge of . . . . . . , and the plaintiff was arrested 
thereon, and imprisoned for . . . . . . [days, or hours, and gave bail in the sum of . . . . . . rupees to obtain his 
release]. 
2. In so doing the defendant acted maliciously and without reasonable or probable cause. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . ., the Magistrate dismissed the complaint of the defendant and 
acquitted the plaintiff. 
4. Many persons, whose names are unknown to the plaintiff, hearing of the arrest, and supposing the plaintiff 
to be a criminal, have ceased to do business with him; or in consequence of the said arrest, the plaintiff lost 
his situation as clerk to one E.F., or in consequence the plaintiff suffered plain of body and mind, and was 
prevented from transacting his business, and was injured in his credit, and incurred expense in obtaining his 
release from the said imprisonment and in defending himself against the said complaint. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1, and Relief claimed.] 
No. 32 
Movables Wrongfully Detained 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19 . . . , plaintiff owned [or state facts showing a right to the possession] the 
goods mentioned in the schedule hereto annexed [or describe the goods.] the estimated value of which is . . . 
. . . rupees. 
2. From that day until the commencement of this suit the defendant has detained the same from the plaintiff. 
3. Before the commencement of the suit, to wit, on the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff demanded 
the same from the defendant, but he refused to deliver them. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
6. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) delivery of the said goods, or . . . . . . rupees, in case delivery cannot be had; 
(2) . . . . . . rupees compensation for the detention thereof. 
The Schedule 
No. 33 
Against a Fraudulent Purchaser and his Transferee with Notice 
(Title) 
A. B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
169

 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
         
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant C.D., for the purpose of including the plaintiff to sell 
him certain goods, represented to the plaintiff that [he was solvent, and worth . . . . . . rupees over all his 
liabilities]. 
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to sell and deliver to C.D. [one hundred boxes of tea], the estimated 
value of which is . . . . . . rupees. 
3. The said representations were false, and were then known by C.D. to be so [or at the time of making the 
said representations, C. D. was insolvent, and knew himself to be so]. 
4. C. D. afterwards transferred the said goods to the defendant E.F. without consideration [or who had notice 
of the falsity of the representation]. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No.1] 
7. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) delivery of the said goods, or . . . . . . rupees, in case delivery cannot be had; 
(2) . . . . . . rupees compensation for the detention thereof. 
No. 34 
Rescission of a Contract on the Ground of Mistake 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant represented to the plaintiff that a certain piece of 
ground belonging to the defendant, situated at . . . . . ., contained [ten bighas]. 
2. The plaintiff was thereby induced to purchase the same at the price of . . . . . . rupees in the belief that the 
said representation was true, and signed an agreement, of which the original is hereto annexed. But the land 
has not been transferred to him. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff paid the defendant rupees as part of the purchase-
money. 
4. That the said piece of ground contained in fact only [five bighas]. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
7. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) . . . . . . rupees, with interest from the . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . ; 
(2) that the said agreement be delivered up and cancelled. 
No. 35 
An Injunction Restraining Waste 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The plaintiff is the absolute owner of [describe the property]. 
2. The defendant is in possession of the same under a lease from the plaintiff. 
3. The defendant has [cut down a number of valuable trees, and threatens to cut down many more for the 
purpose of sale] without the consent of the plaintiff. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
6. The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from committing or permitting any further 
waste on the said premises. 
170

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
  
 
 
        
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
       
 
      
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Pecuniary compensation may also be claimed.] 
No. 36 
Injunction Restraining Nuisance 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. Plaintiff is, and at all the times hereinafter mentioned was, the absolute owner of [the house No. . . . . . . . . 
, Street, Calcutta]. 
2. The defendant is, and at all the said times was, the absolute owner of . . . . . . . . [a plot of ground in the 
same street . . . . . . ]. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the defendant erected upon his said plot a slaughter-house, and still 
maintains the same; and from that day until the present time has continually caused cattle to be brought and 
killed there [and has caused the blood and offal to be thrown into the street opposite the said house of the 
plaintiff]. 
[4. In consequence the plaintiff has been compelled to abandon the said house, and has been unable to rent 
the same.] 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
7. The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from committing or permitting any further 
nuisance. 
No. 37 
Public Nuisance 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The defendant has wrongly heaped up earth and stones on a public road known as . . . . . . Street at . . . . . 
. . . . . .so as to obstruct the passage of the public along the same and threatens and intends, unless 
restrained from so doing, to continue and repeat the said wrongful act. 
[443] [*2. The plaintiff has obtained the leave of the Court for the institution of this suit. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
5. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) a declaration that the defendant is not entitled to obstruct the passage of the public along the said public 
road; 
(2) an injunction restraining the defendant from obstructing the passage of the public along the said public 
road and directing the defendant to remove the earth and stones wrongfully heaped up as aforesaid. 
Not applicable where suit is instituted by the Advocate-General.] 
No. 38 
Injunction against the Diversion of a Water-course 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
[As in Form No. 27.] 
The plaintiff claims that the defendant be restrained by injunction from diverting the water as aforesaid. 
No. 39 
171

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Restoration of Movable Property Threatened with Destruction and for an Injuction 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. Plaintiff is, and at all times hereinafter mentioned was, the owner of [a portrait of his grandfaterher which 
was executed by an eminent painter], and of which no duplicate exists [or state any facts showing that the 
property is of a kind that cannot be replaced by money]. 
2. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , he deposited the same for safe-keeping with the defendant. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , he demanded the same from the defendant and offered to pay all 
reasonable charges for the storage of the same. 
4. The defendant refuses to deliver the same to the plaintiff and threatens to conceal, dispose of, cut or injure 
the same if required to deliver it up. 
5. No pecuniary compensation would be an adequate compensation to the plaintiff for the loss of the 
[painting]; 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
8. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) that the defendant be restrained by injunction from disposing of, injuring or concealing the said [painting]; 
(2) That he be compelled to deliver the same to the plaintiff. 
No. 40 
Interpleader 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. Before the date of the claims hereinafter mentioned G.H. deposited with the plaintiff [describe the property] 
for [safe-keeping]. 
2. The defendant C.D. claims the same [under an alleged assignment thereof to him from G.H.]. 
3. The defendant E.F. also claims the same [under an order of G.H. transferring the same to him.] 
4. The plaintiff is ignorant of the respective rights of the defendants. 
5. He has no claim upon the said property other than for charges and costs, and is ready and willing to 
deliver it to such persons as the Court shall direct. 
6. The suit is not brought by collusion with either of the defendants. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
9. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) that the defendants be restrained, by injunction, from taking any proceedings against the plaintiff in 
relation thereto; 
(20 that they be required to interplead together concerning their claims to the said property; 
[(3) that some person be authorised to receive the said property pending such litigation;] 
(4) that upon delivering the same to such [person] the plaintiff be discharged from all liability to either of the 
defendants in relation thereto. 
No. 41 
Administration by Creditor on Behalf of Himself and all Other Creditors 
172

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
       
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
       
     
   
 
 
 
 
       
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
       
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
       
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
       
 
 
       
        
 
 
 
 
       
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. E.F., late of . . . . . . , was at the time of his death, and his estate still is, indebted to the plaintiff in the sum 
of. . . . [here insert nature of debt and security, if any]. 
2. E.F., died on or about the day of. . . . . . . By his last will, dated the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . he appointed 
C.D. his executor [or devised his estate in trust, etc., or died intenstate, as the case may be.] 
3. The will was proved by C.D. [or] letters of administration were granted, etc.]. 
4. The defendant has possessed himself of the movable [and immovable, or the proceeds of the immovable 
property of E.F., and has not paid the plaintiff his debt. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
7. The plaintiff claims that an account may be taken of the movable [and immovable] property of E.F., 
deceased, and that the same may be administered under the decree of the Court. 
No. 42 
Administration by Specific Legatee 
(Title) 
[Alter Form No. 41 thus] 
[Omit paragraph 1 and commence paragraph 2] E.F., late of . . . . . . , died on or about the . . . . . . day of . . . . 
. . . By his last will, dated the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . he appointed C.D., his executor, and bequeathed to the 
plaintiff [here state the specific legacy]. For paragraph 4 substitute— 
The defendant is in possession of the movable property of E.F., and, amongst other things, of the said [here 
name the subject of the specific bequest]. 
For the Commencement of paragraph 7 substitute— 
The plaintiff claims that the defendant may be ordered to deliver to him the said [here name the subject of 
the specific bequest]. or that, etc. 
No. 43 
Administration by Pecuniary Legatee 
(Title) 
[Alter Form No. 41 thus] 
[Omit paragraph 1 and substitute for paragraph 2] E.F., late of . . . . . . , died on or about the . . . . . . day of . . 
. . . . .By his last will, dated the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . he appointed C.D. his executor, and bequeathed to the 
plaintiff a legacy of . . . . . . rupees. 
In paragraph 4 substitute "legacy" for "debt" 
Another form. 
(Title) 
E.F., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. A.B. of K. in the . . . . . . died on the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . By his last will, dated the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 
, he appointed the defendant and M. N. [who died in the testator's lifetime] his executors, and bequeathed his 
property, whether movable or immovable, to his executors in trust, to pay the rents and income thereof to the 
plaintiff for his life; and after his decease, and in default of his having a son who should attain twenty-one, or 
a daughter who should attain that age or marry, upon trust as to his immovable property for the person who 
would be the testator's heir-at-law, and as to his movable property for the persons who would be the 
testator's next-of-kin if he had died intestate at the time of the death of the plaintiff and such failure of his 
issue as aforesaid. 
173

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. The will was proved by the defendant on the. . . . . . day of. . . . The plaintiff has not been married. 
3. The testator was at his death entitled to movable and immovable property; the defendant entered into the 
receipt of the rents of the immovable property and got in the movable property; he has sold some part of the 
immovable property. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
6. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) to have the movable and immovable property of A.B. administered in this Court, and for that purpose to 
have all proper directions given and accounts taken; 
(2) such further or other relief as the nature of the case may require. 
No. 44 
Execution of Trusts 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. He is one of the trustees under an instrument of settlement bearing date on or about the . . . . . . day of . . . 
. . . made upon the marriage of E.F. and G.H., the father and mother of the defendant [or an instrument of 
transfer of the estate and effects of E.F. for the benefit C.D., the defendant, and the other creditors of E.F.]. 
2. A.B. has taken upon himself the burden of the said trust, and is in possession of [or of the proceeds of] the 
movable and immovable property transferred by the said instrument. 
3. C.D. claims to be entitled to a beneficial interest under the instrument. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form. No. 1.] 
6. The plaintiff is desirous to account for all the rents and profits of the said immovable property [and the 
proceeds of the sale of the said, or of part of the said, immovable property, or movable, or the proceeds of 
the sale of, or of part of, the said movable property, or the profits accruing to the plaintiff as such trustee in 
the execution of the said trust]; and he prays that the Court will take the accounts of the said trust, and also 
that the whole of the said trust estate may be administered in the Court for the benefit of C.D., the defendant, 
and all other persons who may be interested in such administration, in the presence of C.D. and such other 
persons so interested as the Court may direct, or that C.D. may show good cause to the contrary. 
[N.B.—Where the suit is by a beneficiary, the plaint may be modelled mutatis mutandis on the plaint by a 
legatee.] 
No. 45 
Foreclosure or Sale 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The plaintiff is mortgagee of lands belonging to the defendant. 
2. The following are the particular of the mortgage:— 
(a) (date); 
(b) (names of mortgagor and mortgagee); 
(c) (sum secured); 
(d) (rate of interest); 
(e) (property subject to mortgage); 
(f) (amount now due); 
174

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
(g) (if the plaintiff's title is derivative, state shortly the transfers or devolution under which he claims). 
(If the plaintiff is mortgagee in possession add). 
3. The plaintiff took possession of the mortgaged property on the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . and is ready to 
account as mortgagee in possession from that time. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
6. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) payment, or in default [sale or] foreclosure [and possession]; 
[Where Order 34, rule 6, applies.] 
(2) in case the proceeds of the sale are found to be insufficient to pay the amount due to the plaintiff then 
that liberty be reserved to the plaintiff to apply for . . . . . . [2][an order for the balance]. 
No. 46 
Redemption 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. The plaintiff is mortgagor of lands of which the defendant is mortgagee. 
2. The following are the particulars of the mortgage:­
(a) (date); 
(b) (names of mortgagor and mortgagee); 
(c) (sum secured); 
(d) (rate of interest); 
(e) (property subject to mortgage); 
(f) (If the plaintiff's title is derivative, state shortly the transfers or devolution under which he claims). 
(If the defendant is mortgagee in possession, add) 
3. The defendant has taken possession [or has received the rents] of the mortgaged property. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
6. The plaintiff claims to redeem the said property and to have the same reconveyed to him [and to have 
possession thereof]. [444][together with mesne profits]. 
No. 47 
Specific Performance (No. 1) 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. By an agreement dated the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . and signed by the defendant, he contracted to buy of [or 
sell to] the plaintiff certain immovable property therein described and referred to, for the sum of . . . . . . . . . . 
rupees. 
2. The plaintiff has applied to the defendant specifically to perform the agreement on his part, but the 
defendant has not done so. 
3. The plaintiff has been and still is ready and willing specifically to perform the agreement on his part of 
which the defendant has had notice. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
175

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. The plaintiff claims that the Court will order the defendant specifically to perform the agreement and to do 
all acts necessary to put the plaintiff in full possession of the said property [or to accept a transfer and 
possession of the said property] and to pay the costs of the suit. 
No. 48 
Specific Performance (No. 2) 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement, in writing, and 
the original document is hereto annexed. 
The defendant was absolutely entitled to the immovable property described in the agreement. 
2. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff Tendered rupees to the defendant, and demanded a 
transfer of the said property by a sufficient instrument. 
3. On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . , the plaintiff again demanded such transfer. [Or the defendant refused 
to transfer the same to the plaintiff.] 
4. The defendant has not executed any instrument of transfer. 
5. The plaintiff is still ready and willing to pay the purchase-money of the said property to the defendant. 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1] 
8. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) that the defendant transfers the said property to the plaintiff by a sufficient instrument [following the terms 
of the agreement]; 
(2) . . . . . . rupees compensation for withholding the same. 
No. 49 
Partnership 
(Title) 
A.B., the above-named plaintiff, states as follows:— 
1. He and C.D., the defendant, have been for . . . . . . years [or months] past carrying on business together 
under articles of partnership in writing [or under a deed, or under a verbal agreement]. 
2. Several disputes and differences have arisen between the plaintiff and defendant as such partners 
whereby it has become impossible to carry on the business in partnership with advantage to the partners, [Or 
the defendant has committed the following breaches of the partnership articles:— 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) . . . . . . .] 
[As in paras 4 and 5 of Form No. 1.] 
5. The plaintiff claims— 
(1) dissolution of the partnership; 
(2) that accounts be taken; 
(3) that a receiver be appointed. 
(N.B.—In suits for the winding-up of any partnership, omits the claim for dissolution; and instead insert a 
paragraph stating the facts of the partnership having been dissolved.) 
176

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
       
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
      
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
(4) WRITTEN STATEMENTS 
General defences 
Denial—The defendant denies that (set out facts). 
The defendant does not admit that (set out facts). 
The defendant admits that . . . . . . but says that 
The defendant denies that he is a partner in the defendant firm of 
Protest—The defendant denies that he made the contract alleged or any contract with the plaintiff. 
The defendant denies that he contracted with the plaintiff as alleged or at all. 
The defendant admits assets but not the plaintiff's claim. 
The defendant denies that the plaintiff sold to him the goods mentioned in the plaint or any of them. 
Limitation—The suit is barred by article . . . . . . or article . . . . . . . . .of the second schedule to the 
[445][Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 1877)]. 
Jurisdiction—The Court has no jurisdiction to hear the suit on the ground that (set forth the grounds.) 
On the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . a diamond ring was delivered by the defendant to and accepted by the plaintiff 
in discharge of the alleged cause of action. 
Insolvency—The defendant has been adjudged an insolvent. 
The plaintiff before the institution of the suit was adjudged an insolvent and the right to sue vested in the 
receiver. 
Minority—The defendant was a minor at the time of making the alleged contract. 
Payment into Court—The defendant as to the whole claim (or as to Rs. . . . . . . part of the money claimed, or 
as the case may be) has paid into Court Rs. . . . . . . and says that this sum is enough to satisfy the plaintiff's 
claim (or the part aforesaid). 
Performance remitted—The performance of the promise alleged was remitted on the (date). 
Rescission—The contract was rescinded by agreement between the plaintiff and defendant. 
Res judicata—The plaintiff's claim is barred by the decree in suit (give the reference). 
Estoppel—The plaintiff is estopped from denying the truth of (insert statement as to which estoppel is 
claimed) because (here state the facts relied on as creating the estoppel.) 
Ground of defence subsequent to institution of suit—Since the institution of the suit, that is to say, on the. . . 
.. day of. . . . . . (set out facts.) 
No. 1 
Defence in Suits for Goods Sold and Delivered 
1. The defendant did not order the goods. 
2. The goods were not delivered to the defendant. 
3. The price was not Rs. 
[or] 
4. 1. 
5. Except as to Rs. . . . . . . , same as 2. 
6. 3. 
177

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. The defendant [or A.B., the defendant's agent] satisfied the claim by payment before suit to the plaintiff [or 
to C.D., the plaintiff's agent] on the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . 19. . . 
8. The defendant satisfied the claim by payment after suit to the plaintiff on the . . . . . . day of 19. . . . 
No. 2 
Defence in Suits on Bonds 
1. The bond is not the defendant's bond. 
2. The defendant made payment to the plaintiff on the day according to the condition of the bond. 
3. The defendant made payment to the plaintiff after the day named and before suit of the principal and 
interest mentioned in the bond. 
No. 3 
Defence In Suits On Guarantees 
1. The principal satisfied the claim by payment before suit. 
2. The defendant was released by the plaintiff giving time to the principal debtor in pursuance of a binding 
agreement. 
No. 4 
Defence In Any Suit For Debt 
1. As to Rs. 200 of the money claimed, the defendant is entitled to set off for goods sold and delivered by the 
defendant to the plaintiff. 
Particulars are as follows:- Rs. 
1907 January 25th 150 
1907 February 1st 50 
Total 200 
2. As to the whole [or as to Rs. . . ., part of the money claimed] the defendant made tender before suit of Rs. 
. . . . and has paid the same into Court. 
No. 5 
Defence In Suits For Injuries Caused By Negligent Driving 
1. The defendant denies that the carriage mentioned in the plaint was the defendant's carriage, and that it 
was under the charge or control of the defendant's servants. The carriage belonged to. . . . of . . . . . . . . . 
.Street, Calcutta, livery stable keepers employed by the defendant to supply him with carriages and horses; 
and the person under whose charge and control the said carriage was, was the servant of the said. 
2. The defendant does not admit that the said carriage was turned out of Middleton Street either negligently, 
suddenly or without warning, or at a rapid or dangerous pace. 
3. The defendant says the plaintiff might and could, by the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, have 
seen the said carriage approaching him, and avoided any collision with it. 
4. The defendant does not admit the statements contained in the third paragraph of the plaint. 
No. 6 
Defence In All Suits For Wrongs 
1. Denial of the several acts [or matters] complained of. 
No. 7 
Defence In Suits For Detention Of Goods 
178

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. The goods were not the property of the plaintiff. 
2. The goods were detained for a lien to which the defendant was entitled. 
Particulars are as follows:­
1907, May 3rd, To carriage of the goods claimed from Delhi to Calcutta:­
45 maunds at Rs. 2 per maund. . . .Rs. 90. 
No. 8 
Defence In Suits For Infringement Of Copyright 
1. The plainiff is not the author [assignee, etc.] 
2. The book was not registered. 
3. The defendant did not infringe. 
No. 9 
Defence In Suits For Infringement Of Trade Mark 
1. The trade mark is not the plaintiff's 
2. The alleged trade mark is not a trade mark. 
3. The defendant did not infringe. 
No. 10 
Defence In Suits Relating To Nuisances 
1. The plaintiff's lights are not ancient [or deny his other alleged prescriptive rights.] 
2. The plaintiff's lights will not be materially interfered with by the defendant's buildings. 
3. The defendant denies that he or his servants pollute the water [or do what is complained of]. 
[If the defendant claims the right by prescription or otherwise to do what is complained of, he must say so, 
and must state the grounds of the claim, i.e., whether by prescription, grant or what.] 
4. The plaintiff has been guilty of laches of which the following are particulars:— 
1870. Plaintiff's mill began to work. 
1871. Plaintiff came into possession. 
1883. First complaint. 
5. As to the plaintiff's claim for damages the defendant will rely on the above grounds of the defence, and 
says that the acts complained of have not produced any damage to the plaintiff [If other grounds are relied 
on, they must be stated, e.g., limitation as to past damage.] 
No. 11 
Defence To Suit For Foreclosure 
1. The defendant did not execute the mortagage. 
2. The mortgage was not transferred to the plaintiff (if more than one transfer is alleged, say which is 
denied). 
3. The suit is barred by article . . . . . . of the second scheduled to the [446][Indian Limitation Act, 1877 (15 of 
1877).] 
4. The following payments have been made, viz.:— 
(Insert date) Rs. 1,000 
179

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Insert date) Rs. 500 
5. The plaintiff took possession on the . . . . of. . . .., and has received the rents ever since. 
6. The plaintiff released the debt on the. . . of. . . 
7. The defendant transferred all his interest to A.B. by a document dated. 
No. 12 
Defence To Suit For Redemption 
1. The plaintiff's right to redeem is barred by article . . . of the second schedule to the [447][Indian Limitation 
Act, 1877 (15 of 1877).] 
2. The plaintiff transferred all interest in the property to A.B. 
3. The defendant, by a document dated the . . . day of . . . . transferred all his interest in the mortgage-debt 
and property comprised in the mortgage to A.B. 
4. The defendant never too possession of the mortgaged property, or received the rents thereof. 
(If the defendant admits possession for a time only, he should state the time and deny possession beyond 
what he admits.) 
No. 13 
Defence To Suit For Specific Performance 
1. The defendant did not enter into the agreement. 
2. A. B. was not the agent of the defendant (if alleged by plaintiff). 
3. The plaintiff has not performed the following conditions—(Conditions). 
4. The defendant did not—(alleged acts of part performance). 
5. The plaintiff's title to the property agreed to be sold is not such as the defendant is bound to accept by 
reason of the following matter—(State why). 
6. The agreement is uncertain in the following respects—(State them). 
7. (or) The plaintiff has been guilty of delay. 
8. (or) The plaintiff has been guilty of fraud (or misrepresentation). 
9. (or) The agreement is unfair. 
10. (or) The agreement was entered into by mistake. 
11. The following are particulars of (7), (8), (9), (10) (or as the case may be). 
12. The agreement was rescinded under Conditions of Sale, No. 11 (or by mutual agreement). 
(In cases where damages are claimed and the defendant disputes his liability to damages, he must deny the 
agreement or the alleged breaches, or show whatever other ground of defence he intends to rely on, e.g., 
the [448][Indian Limitation Act,] accord and satisfaction, release, fraud, etc.) 
No. 14 
Defence In Administration Suit By Pecuniary Legatee 
1. A. B.'s will contained a charge of debts; he died insolvent; he was entitled at his death to some immovable 
property which the defendant sold and which produced the net sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . , and the testator had 
some movable property which the defendant got in, and which produced the net sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . 
2. The defendant applied the whole of the said sums and the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . which the defendant 
received from rents of the immovable property in the payment of the funeral and testamentary expenses and 
some of the debts of the testator. 
180

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
      
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
   
       
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. The defendant made up his accounts and sent a copy thereof to the plaintiff on the . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . 
. . .19 . . . , and offered to plaintiff free access to the vouchers to verify such accounts, but he declined to 
avail himself of the defendant's offer. 
4. The defendant submits that the plaintiff ought to pay the cost of this suit. 
No. 15 
Probate Of Will In Solemn Form 
1. The said will and codicil of the deceased were not duly executed according to the provisions of the 
[449][Indian Succession Act, 1865 (10 of 1865)] [or of the [450]Hindu Wills Act, 1870 (21 of 1870)]. 
2. The deceased at the time the said will and codicil respectively purport to have been executed, was not of 
sound mind, memory and understanding. 
3. The execution of the said will and codicil was obtained by the undue influence of the plaintiff [and others 
acting with him whose names are at present unknown to the defendant]. 
4. The execution of the said will and codicil was obtained by the fraud of the plaintiff, such fraud so far as is 
within the defendant's present knowledge, being [state the nature of the fraud]. 
5. The deceased at the time of the execution of the said will and codicil did not know and approve the 
contents thereof [or of the contents of the residuary clause in the said will, as the case may be]. 
6. The deceased made his true last will, dated the 1st January, 1873, and thereby appointed the defendant 
sole executor thereof. 
The defendant claims— 
(1) that the Court will pronounce against the said will and codicil propounded by the plaintiff; 
(2) that the Court will decree probate of the will of the deceased, dated the 1st January, 1873, in solemn form 
of law. 
No. 16 
Particulars (O. 6, R. 5.) 
(Title of suit) 
Particulars.—The following are the particulars of (here state the matters in respect of which particulars have 
been ordered) delivered pursuant to the order of the . . . . . . . . . of 
(Here set out the particulars ordered in paragraphs if necessary.) 
APPENDIX B 
PROCESS 
No. 1 
Summons For Disposal Of Suit (O. 5, R. 1, 5.) 
(Title) 
To 
[Name, description and place of residence.] 
Whereas 
has instituted a suit against you for . . . . . . . . . you are hereby summoned to appear in this Court in person 
or by a pleader duly instructed (and able to answer all material questions relating to the suit, or who shall be 
accompanied by some person, able to answer all such questions, on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
. . ., at . . . . . . o'clock in the . . . . . . . . . noon, to answer the claim; and as the day fixed for your appearance 
is appointed for the final disposal of the suit, you must be prepared to produce on that day all the witnesses 
upon whose evidence and all the documents upon which you intend to rely in support of your defence. 
181

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
          
     
          
  
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
          
 
          
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
Take notice that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard and 
determined in your absence. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . . 
Judge. 
Notice.—1. Should you apprehend your witnesses will not attend of their own accord, you can have a 
summons from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness, and the production of any document that 
you have a right to call upon the witness to produce, on applying to the Court and on depositing the 
necessary expenses. 
2. If you admit the claim, you should pay the money into Court together with the costs of the suit, to avoid 
execution of the decree, which may be against your person or property, or both. 
No. 2 
Summons For Settlement Of Issues (O. 5, R. 1, 5.) 
(Title) 
To 
[Name, description and place of residence.] 
Whereas 
has instituted a suit against you for . . . . . . . . . you are hereby summoned to appear in this Court in person, 
or by a pleader duly instructed, and able to answer all material questions relating to the suit, or who shall be 
accompanied by some persons able to answer all such questions, on the . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . ., 
at . . . . . . . . . o'clock in the . . . . . . . . . noon, to answer the claim; [451][and further you are hereby directed 
to file on that day a written statement of your defence and to produce on the said day all documents in your 
possession or power upon which you base your defence or claim for set-off or counter-claim, and where you 
rely on any other document whether in your possession or power or not, as evidence in support of your 
defence or claim for set-off or counter-claim, you shall enter such documents in a list to be annexed to the 
written statement]. 
Take notice that, in default of your appearance on the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard and 
determined in your absence. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . day . . . . . . . . . 19...., 
Judge. 
Notice.—1. Should you apprehend your witnesses will not attend of their own accord, you can have a 
summons from this Court to compel the attendance of any witness, and the production of any document that 
you have a right to call on the witness to produce, on applying to the Court and on depositing the necessary 
expenses. 
2. If you admit the claim, you should pay the money into Court together with the costs of the suit, to avoid 
execution of the decree, which may be against your person or property, or both. 
No. 3 
Summons To Appear In Person (O. 5, R. 3.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
[Name, description and place of residence.] 
Whereas 
has instituted a suit against you for . . . . . . . . . you are hereby summoned to appear in this Court in person 
on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... at . . . . . . . . . o'clock in the . . . . . . . . . noon, to answer the claim; 
182

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
             
      
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
 
          
 
  
          
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and you are directed to produce on that day all the documents upon which you intend to rely in support of 
your defence. 
Take notice that, in default of your appearance of the day before mentioned, the suit will be heard and 
determined in your absence. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
[452][No. 4 
Summons in a Summary Suit 
(Order XXXVII, Rule 2) 
(Title) 
To 
o
[Name, description and place of residence.] 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has instituted a suit against you under Order XXXVII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, for Rs. . . . . . . . . . and interest, you are hereby summoned to cause and appearance to be entered for 
you, within ten days from the service hereof, in default hereof the plaintiff will be entitled, after the expiration 
of the said period of ten days, to obtain a decree for any sum not exceeding the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . and 
the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . for costs, together with such interest, if any, as the Court may order. 
If you cause an appearance to be entered for you, the plaintiff will thereafter serve upon you a summons for 
judgment at a hearing of which you will be entitled to move the Court for leave to defend the suit. 
Leave to defend may be obtained if you satisfy the Court by affidavit or otherwise that there is a defence to 
o
the suit on the merits or that it is reasonable that you should be allowed to defend. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... 
Judge. 
[3][No. 4A 
SUMMONS FOR JUDGMENT IN A SUMMARY SUIT 
(Order XXXVII, Rule 3) 
(Title) 
In the . . . . . . . . . Court, at . . . . . . . . . suit No. . . . . . . . . . of 19... 
XYZ . . . . . . . . . Plaintiff. 
Versus 
ABC . . . . . . . . . Defendant. 
Upon reading the affidavit of the plaintiff the Court makes the following order, namely:— 
Let all parties concerned attend the Court or Judge, as the case may be, on the . . . . . . . . . day of 19..., at ... 
o'clock in the forenoon on the hearing of the application of the plaintiff that he be at liberty to obtain judgment 
in this suit against the defendant (or if against one or some or several, insert names) for Rs. . . . . . . . . . and 
for interest and costs. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19...] 
No. 5 
Notice to Person who, the Court Considers, should be added as Co-Plaintiff 
(O. 1, R. 10.) 
183

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
  
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
              
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
          
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Title) 
To 
o
[Name, description and place of residence.] 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has instituted the above suit against . . . . . . . . . for . . . . . . . . . and whereas it appears 
necessary that you should be added as a plaintiff in the said suit in order to enable the Court effectually and 
completely to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved. 
Take notice that you should on or before the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19..., signify to this Court whether 
you consent to be so added. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19..., 
Judge. 
No. 6 
Summons to Legal Representative of a Deceased Defendant 
(O. 22, R. 4.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
Whereas the plaintiff . . . . . . . . . instituted a suit in this Court on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19..., 
against the defendant . . . . . . . . . who has since deceased, and whereas the said plaintiff has made an 
application to this Court alleging that you are the legal representative of the said, deceased, and desiring that 
you be made the defendant in his stead; 
You are hereby summoned to attend in this Court on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19..., at . . . . . . . . . 
a.m. to defend the said suit and, in default of your appearance on the day specified, the said suit will be 
heard and determined in your absence. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19..., 
Judge. 
No. 7 
Order for Transmission of Summons for Service in the Jurisdiction of another Court 
(O. 5, R. 21.) 
(Title) 
Whereas it is stated that 
defendant/witness in the above suit is at present residing in . . . . . . . . . : It is ordered that a summons 
returnable on the day of . . . . . . . . . 19..., be forwarded to the Court of . . . . . . . . . for service on the said 
defendant/witness with a duplicate of this proceeding. 
The court-fee of . . . . . . . . . chargeable in respect to the summons has been realised in this Court in 
stamps.Dated . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
Judge. 
No. 8 
Order for Transmission of Summons to be Served on a Prisoner 
(O. 5, R. 25.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
184

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
            
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
  
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
            
 
 
          
 
 
 
    
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
          
 
 
           
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
  
  
 
 
 
           
 
          
 
  
 
 
 
 
          
          
     
 
 
  
         
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
          
  
 
 
          
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Superintendent of the Jail at 
Under the provisions of Order V, rule 24, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, a summons in duplicate is 
herewith forwarded for service on the defendant . . . . . . . . . who is . . . . . . . . . a prisoner in jail. You are 
requested to cause a copy of the said summons to be served upon the said defendant and to return the 
original to this Court signed by the said defendant, with a statement of service endorsed thereon by you. 
Judge. 
No. 9 
Order for Transmission of Summons to be Served on a Public Servant or Soldier 
(O. 5, RR. 27, 28.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
Under the provisions of Order V, rule 27 (or 28, as the case may be), of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, a 
summons in duplicate is herewith forward for service on the defendant . . . . . . . . . who is stated to be serving 
under you. You are requested to cause a copy of the said summons to be served upon the said defendant 
and to return the original to this Court signed by the said defendant, with a statement of service endorsed 
thereon by you. 
Judge. 
No. 10 
To Accompany Returns of Summons of Another Court 
(O. 5, R. 23.) 
Read proceeding from the . . . . . . . . . forwarding . . . . . . . . . for service on in suit No. . . . . . . . . . of 19..., of 
that Court. 
Read Serving Officer's endorsement stating that the . . . . . . . . . and proof of the above having been duly 
taken by me on the oath of . . . . . . . . . and . . . . . . . . . it is ordered that the . . . . . . . . . be returned to the . . . 
. . . . . . with a copy of this proceeding. 
Judge. 
Note.—This form will be applicable to process other than summons, the service of which may have to be 
effected in the same manner. 
No. 11 
Affidavit Of Process-service To Accompany Return Of A Summons Or Notice 
(O. 5, R. 18.) 
(Title) 
The Affidavit of . . . . . . . . . . . ., son of . . . . . . . . . make oath/affirm 
I . . . . . . . . . 
and say as follows:­
(1) I am a process-server of this Court. 
(2) On the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... I received a summons/notice issued by the Court . . . . . . . . . in 
Suit No. . . . . . . . . . of 19..., in the said Court, dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . , for service on . 
. . . . . . . . 
(3) The said . . . . . . . . . was at the time personally known to me, and I served the said summons/notice on 
him/her on the . . . . . . . . . day of...19, at about . . . . . . . . . o'clock in the noon at . . . . . . . . . by tendering a 
copy thereof to him/her and requiring his/her signature to the original summons/notice. 
185

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
     
 
               
 
              
 
                
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                 
 
 
                
 
          
 
 
          
 
          
  
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
    
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Here state whether the person served signed or refused to sign the process, and in whose presence. 
(b) Signature of process-server. 
or, 
(3) The said . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . not being personally known to me . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . accompanied me to 
the said summons/notice on his/her on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . , at about. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
o'clock in the . . . . . . . . . . . . . noon at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . by tendering a copy thereof to him/her and requiring 
his /her signature to the original summons/notice. 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Here state whether the person served signed or refused to sign the process, and in whose presence. 
(b) Signature of process-server. 
or, 
(3) The said . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . and the house in which he ordinarily resides being personally known to me, I 
went to the said house, in . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . and thereon the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19..., at 
about . . . . . . . . . o'clock in the . . . . . . . . . noon, I did not find the said. . . . . . . . . . . . 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Enter fully and exactly the manner in which the process was served, with special reference to Order 5, 
rules 15 and 17. 
(b) Signature of process-server. 
or, 
(3) One . . . . . . . . . accompanied me to . . . . . . . . . and there pointed out to me which he said was the house 
in which . . . . . . . . . ordinarily resides. I did not find the said there. 
(a) 
(b) 
(a) Enter fully and exactly the manner in which the process was served, with special reference to Order 5, 
rule 15 and 17. 
(b) Signature of process-server. 
or 
If substituted service has been ordered, state fully and exactly the manner in which the summons was served 
with special reference to the terms of the order for substituted service. 
Sworn/Affirmed by the said . . . . . . . . before me this. . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... before me this 
Empowered under section 139 of the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908, to administer the 
oath to deponents. 
No. 12 
Notice To Defendant 
186

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
          
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
          
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
       
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
               
               
 
           
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O. 9, R. 6.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
[Name, description and place of residence.] 
Whereas this day was fixed for the hearing of the above suit and a summons was issued to you and the 
plaintiff has appeared in this Court and you did not so appear, but from the return of the Nazir it has been 
proved to the satisfaction of the Court that the said summons was served on you but not in sufficient time to 
enable you to appear and answer on the day fixed in the said summons; 
Notice is hereby given to you that the hearing of the suit is adjourned this day and that the day of . . . . . . . . . 
19... is now fixed for the hearing of the same; in default of your appearance on the day last mentioned the 
suit will be heard and determined in your absence. 
GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day . . . . . . . . . 19... 
Judge. 
No. 13 
Summons To Witness 
(O. 16, RR. 1, 5.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
Whereas your attendance is required to . . . . . . . . . on behalf of the . . . . . . . . . in the above suit, you are 
hereby required [personally] to appear before this Court on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . at . . . . . . 
. . . o'clock in the forenoon, and to bring with you [or to send to this . . . . . . . . . Court]. 
A sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . , being your travelling and other expenses and subsistence allowance for one day, 
is herewith sent. If you fail to comply with this order without lawful excuse, you will be subject to the 
consequences of non-attendance laid down in rule 12 of Order XVI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... 
Judge. 
Notice.—(1) If you are summoned only to produce a document and not to give evidence, you shall be 
deemed to have complied with the summons if you cause such document to be produced in this Court on the 
day and hour aforesaid. 
(2) If you are detained beyond the day aforesaid, a sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . will be tendered to you for each 
day's attendance beyond the day specified. 
No. 14 
Proclamation Requiring Attendance Of Witness 
(O. 16, R. 10) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas it appears from the examination on oath of the serving officer that the summons could not be 
served upon the witness in the manner prescribed by law: and whereas it appears that the evidence of the 
witness is material, and he absconds and keeps out of the way for the purpose of evading the service of the 
summons: This proclamation is, therefore, under rule 10 of Order XVI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, 
issued requiring the attendance of the witness in this Court on the . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. 19 . . . . . . . . . . at . . . . . . . . . o'clock in the forenoon and from day to day until he shall have leave to depart; 
and if the witness fails to attend on the day and hour aforesaid he will be dealt with according to law. 
187

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
 
        
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
               
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
          
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
               
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19. . . . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 15 
Proclamation Requiring Attendance Of Witness 
(O. 16, R. 10.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
Whereas it appears from the examination on oath of the serving officer that the summons has been duly 
served upon the witness, and whereas it appears that the evidence of the witness is material and he has 
failed to attend in compliance with such summons: This proclamation is, therefore, under rule 10 of Order 
XVI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, issued requiring the attendance of the witness in this Court on the 
day of . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . 19 at .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . o'clock in the forenoon, and from day to day until he shall 
have leave to depart; and if the witness fails to attend on the day and hour aforesaid he will be dealt with 
according to law. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court. this . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . .. 
Judge. 
No. 16 
Warrant Of Attachment Of Property Of Witness 
(O. 16, R. 10.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
The Bailiff of the Court. 
Whereas the witness . . . . . . . . . 
cited by . . . . . . . . . . . . 
has not, after the expiration of the period limited in the proclamation issued for his attendance, appeared in 
Court; You are hereby directed to hold under attachment . . . . . . . . . property belonging to the said witness to 
the value of . . . . . . . . . and to submit a return, accompanied with an inventory thereof, within . . . . . . . . . 
days. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . 19 . . . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 17 
Warrant Of Arrest Of Witness 
(O. 16, R. 10.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
The Bailiff of the Court. 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has been duly served with a summons but has failed to attend (absconds and keeps out 
of the way for the purpose of avoiding service of a summons); You are hereby ordered to arrest and bring the 
said . . . . . . . . . before the Court. 
188

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
       
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
        
    
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
        
          
           
     
  
You are further ordered to return this warrant on or before the . . . . . . . . . day of 19... with an endorsement 
certifying the day on and the manner in which it has been executed, or the reason why it has not been 
executed. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... 
Judge. 
No. 18 
Warrant Of Committal 
(O. 16 R. 16.) 
(Title) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at 
Whereas the plaintiff (or defendant) in the above-named suit has made application to this Court that security 
be taken for the appearance of . . . . . . . . . to . . . . . . . . . give evidence (or to produce a document), on the . . 
. . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19...; and whereas the Court has called upon the said . . . . . . . . . to furnish such 
security, which he has failed to do; This is to require you to receive the said....into your custody in the civil 
prison and to produce him before this Court at . . . . . . . . . on the said day and on such other day or days as 
may be hereafter ordered. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... 
Judge. 
No. 19 
Warrant Of Committal 
(O. 16, R. 18.) 
(Title) 
To 
o
The Officer in Charge of the Jail at 
Whereas, whose attendance is required before this Court in the above-named case to give evidence (or to 
o
produce a document), has been arrested and brought before the Court in custody; and whereas owing to the 
absence of the plaintiff (or defendant), the said . . . . . . . . . cannot give such evidence (or produce such 
document); and whereas the Court has called upon the said . . . . . . . . . to give security for his appearance 
on the . . . . .. . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19. . . , at . . . . . . . . . which he has failed to do; This is to require you 
to receive the said... into your custody in the civil prison and to produce him before this Court at . . . . . . . . . 
on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19.... 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... 
Judge. 
Appendix C 
DISCOVERY, INSPECTION AND ADMISSION 
No. 1 
Order for Delivery of Interrogatories 
(O. 11, R. 1.) 
In the Court of . . . . . . . . . Civil Suit No. . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . . . . . . 
A.B. . . . . Plaintiff, 
189

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
    
      
      
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
                   
  
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
           
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
     
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
against 
C. D. E. F. and G. H . . . . . . . . . Defendants. 
Upon hearing . . . . . . . . . and upon reading the affidavit of . . . . . . . . . filed the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . 19 . . . . . 
. . . . It is ordered that the . . . . . . . . . be at liberty to deliver to the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .interrogatories in 
writing, and that the said . . . . . . . . . do answer the interrogatories as prescribed by Order XI, rule 8, and that 
the costs of this application be. 
No. 2 
Interrogatories 
(O. 11, R. 4.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra.) 
Interrogatories on behalf of the above-named [Plaintiff or defendant C.D.] for the examination of the above-
named [defendants E.F. and G. H. or plaintiff]. 
1. Did not, etc. 
2. Has not, etc. . . . . . . . . . etc., . . . . . . . . . etc., . . . . . . . . . etc. 
[The defendant E. F. is required to answer the interrogatories numbered. . . . . . . . . .. ] 
[The defendant G.H. is required to answer the interrogatories numbered. . . . . . . . . . .] 
No. 3 
Answer To Interrogatories 
(O. 11, R. 9.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra.) 
The answer of the above-named defendant E.F., to the interrogations for his examination by the above-
named plaintiff. 
In answer to the said interrogatories, I, the above-named E.F., make oath and say as follow:— 
1. 
2. Enter answers to interrogatories in paragraphs numbered consecutively.DJ0 
3. I object to answer the interrogatories numbered on the ground that [state grounds of objection]. 
No. 4 
Order for Affidavit as to Documents 
(O. 11, R. 12.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra.) 
Upon hearing . . . . . . . . . ; It is ordered that the . . . . do within . . . . . . . . . days from the date of this order, 
answer on affidavit stating which documents are or have been in his possession or power relating to the 
matter in question in this suit, and that the costs of this application be. 
No. 5 
Affidavit as to Documents 
(O. 11, R. 13.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra.) 
I, the above-named defendant C. D., make oath and say as follows:— 
190

 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
          
   
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
           
 
 
 
           
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. I have in my possession or power the documents relating to the matters in question in this suit set forth in 
the first and second parts of the first schedule hereto. 
2. I object to produce the said documents set forth in the second part of the first schedule hereto [state 
grounds of objection]. 
3. I have had but have not now, in my possession or power the documents relating to the matters in question 
in this suit set forth in the second schedule hereto. 
4. The last-mentioned documents were last in my possession or power on [state when and what has become 
of them and in whose possession they now are]. 
5. Accordingly to the best of my knowledge, information and belief I have not now, and never had, in my 
possession, custody or power, or in the possession, custody or power of my pleader or agent, or in the 
possession custody or power of any other person on my behalf, any account, book of account, voucher, 
receipt, letter memorandum, paper or writing, or any copy of or extract from any such document, or any other 
documents whatsoever, relating to the matters in question in this suit or any of them, or wherein any entry 
has been made relative to such matters or any of them, other than and except the documents set forth in the 
said first and second schedules hereto. 
No. 6 
Order to Produce Documents for Inspection 
(O. 11, R. 14.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra). 
Upon hearing . . . . . . . . . and upon reading the affidavit of . . . . . . . . . filed the day of . . . . . . . . . 19... It is 
ordered that the . . . . . . . . . do, at all reasonable times, on reasonable notice, produce at . . . . . . . . . situate 
at . . . . . . . . . , the following documents, namely, . . . . . . . . . , and that the . . . . . . . . . be at libery to inspect 
and persue the documents so produced, and to make notes of their contents. In the meantime, it is ordered 
that all further proceedings be stayed and that the costs of this application be. 
No. 7 
Notice to Produce Documents 
(O. 11. R. 16) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra.) 
Take notice that the [plaintiff or defendant] requires you to produce for his inspection the following 
documents referred to in your [plaint or written statement or affidavit, dated that . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 
19...]. 
[Describe documents required.] 
X. Y., Pleader for the 
To Z., Pleader for the. 
No. 8 
Notice to Inspect Documents 
(O. 11, R. 17.) 
(Title as in No. 1. supra.) 
Take notice that you can inspect the documents mentioned in your notice of the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 
19... except the documents numbered in that notice] at [insert place of inspection] on Thursday next, . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . the instant, between the hours of 12 and 4 o'clock. 
Or, that the [plaintiff or defendant] objects to giving you inspection of documents mentioned in your notice of 
the . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... on the ground that [State the ground]. 
191

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
No. 9 
Notice to Admit Documents 
(O. 12, R. 3.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra.) 
Take notice that the plaintiff [or defendant] in this suit proposes to adduce in evidence the several document 
hereunder specified, and that the same may be inspected by the defendant [or plaintiff] his pleader or agent, 
at . . . . . . . . . on . . . . . . . . . between the hours of . . . . . . . . . ; and the defendant [or plaintiff] is hereby 
required, within forty-eight hours from the ... last-mentioned hour, to admit that such of the said documents 
as are specified to be originals were respectively written, signed or executed, as they purport respectively to 
have been; that such as are specified as copies are true copies; and such documents as are stated to have 
been served, sent or delivered were so served, sent or delivered, respectively, saving all just exceptions to 
the admissibility of all such documents as evidence in this suit. 
G.H., pleader [or agent] for plaintiff 
[or defendant] 
To E.F., pleader [or agent] for defendant [or plaintiff]. 
[Here describe the documents and specify as to each document whether it is original or a copy.] 
No. 10 
Notice to Admit Facts 
(O. 12, R. 5.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra.) 
Take notice that the plaintiff [or defendant] in this suit requires the defendant [or plaintiff] to admit, for the 
purposes of this suit only, the several facts respectively hereunder specified; and the defendant [or plaintiff] 
is hereby required, within six days from the service of this notice, to admit the said several facts, saving all 
just exceptions to the admissibility of such facts as evidence in this suit. 
G.H. pleader [or agent] for plaintiff [or defendant]. 
To E.F., pleader [or agent] for defendant [or plaintiff]. 
The facts, the admission of which is required, are:— 
1. That M. died on the 1st January, 1890. 
2. That he died intestate. 
3. That N. was his only lawful son. 
4. That O. died on the 1st April, 1896. 
5. That O. was never married. 
No. 11 
Admission of Facts Pursuant to Notice 
(O. 12, R. 5.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra.) 
The defendant [or plaintiff] in this suit, for the purposes of this suit only, hereby admits the several facts 
respectively hereunder specified, subject to the qualifications or limitations, if any, hereunder specified, 
saving all-just exceptions to the admissibility of any such facts, or any of them, as evidence in this suit: 
192

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
   
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
       
   
 
 
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Provided that this admission is made for the purposes of this suit only, and is not an admission to be used 
against the defendant [or plaintiff] on any other occasion or by any one other than the plaintiff [or defendant 
or party requiring the admission]. 
E.F., pleader [or agent] for defendant 
[or plaintiff] 
To G.H., pleader [or agent] for plaintiff [or defendant]. 
Facts admitted 
Qualification or limitation, if any, subject to which they are admitted 
1. That M. died on Ist January, 1890 
2. That he died intestate 
3. That N. was his lawful son 
4. That O. Died 
5. That O. was never married. 
1. 
2. 
3. But not that he was hid only lawfulo son . 
4. But not that he died on the Ist April, 1896. 
5. 
No. 12 
Notice to Produce (General Form) 
(O. 12, R. 8.) 
(Title as in No. 1, supra) 
Take notice that you are hereby required to produce and show to the Court at the first hearing of this suit all 
books, papers, letters, copies of letters and other writings and documents in your custody, possession of 
power, containing any entry, memorandum or minute relating to the matters in question in this suit, and 
particularly. 
G.H., pleader [or agent] for plaintiff [or defendant]. 
To E.F., pleader [or agent] for defendant [or plaintiff]. 
APPENDIX D 
DECREES 
No. 1 
Decree in Original Suit 
(O. 20, RR. 6, 7.) 
(Title) 
Claim for 
This suit coming on this day for final disposal before . . . . . in the presence of . . . . . . . . . for the plaintiff and 
of . . . . . . . . . . . . for the defendant, it is ordered and decreed that . . . . . . . . . and that the sum of Rs. . . . . . . 
. . . be paid by the . . . . . . . . . to the . . . . . . . . . on account of the costs of this suit, with interest thereon at 
the rate of . . . . . . . . . per cent, per annum from this date to date of realization. 
193

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
           
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
   
 
 
        
 
 
       
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
    
     
     
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... 
Judge. 
Costs of Suit 
Plaintiff 
Defendant 
Rs. 
A. 
P. 
Rs. 
A. 
P. 
stamp for plaint 
Do. For power 
Do. Of exhibits 
Pleader's fee on Rs. 
Subsistence for witnesses 
Commission fee 
Service of process 
Total 
Stamp for Power 
Do.for petition 
Pleader's fee 
Subsistence for witnesses 
Service of process 
Commissioner's fee 
Total 
No. 2 
Simple Money Decree 
(Section 34) 
(Title) 
Claim for 
This suit coming on this . . . . . . . . . day for final disposal before . . . . . . . . . in the presence of . . . . . for the 
plaintiff and of . . . . . . . . . for the defendant; It is ordered that the . . . . . . . .do pay to the . . . .. . . the sum of 
Rs. . . . . . . . . . with interest thereon at the rate of . . . . . . . . . per cent per annum from . . . . . . to the date of 
realization of the said sum and do also pay Rs.... , the cost of this suit, with interest thereon at the rate of . . . 
. . . . . . per cent per annum from this date to the date of realization. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day . . . . of . . . . 19 . . . 
194

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
         
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge. 
Costs of Suit 
Plaintiff 
Defendant 
Rs. 
A. 
P. 
Rs. 
A. 
P. 
Stamp for plaint 
Do. For power 
Do. Of exhibits 
Pleader's fee on Rs. 
Subsistence for witnesses 
Commission 
Serivce of process 
Total 
Stamp for power 
Do. for petition 
Pleader's fee 
Subsistence for witnesses 
Service of process 
Commissioner's fee 
Total 
No. 3 
Preliminary Decree for Foreclosure 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 2—Where accounts are directed to be taken.) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this . . . . . . . . . day, etc.; It is hereby ordered and decreed that it be referred to . . . . . . . . 
. . . . as this Commissioner to take the accounts following:— 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the plaintiff for principal and interest on his mortgage mentioned 
in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal or where no such rate is fixed, 
at six per cent per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable); 
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the plaintiff or by any 
other person by the order or for the use of the plaintiff or which without the wilful default of the plaintiff or 
such person might have been so received; 
195

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred by the plaintiff up to this date for costs, charges and 
expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage-security, together with interest thereon 
(such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or failing such rate, at the same rate as 
is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent, per annum); 
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any act or 
omission of the plaintiff which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the property or by his failure to 
perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or by the terms of the 
mortgage-deed. 
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause (ii) or adjudged due 
under clause (iv) above, together with interest thereon, shall first be adjusted against any sums paid by the 
plaintiff under clause (iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to the 
mortgage-money or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the plaintiff on 
account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal. 
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court with all 
convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before the . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . and that upon 
such report of the Commissioner being received, it shall be confirmed and countersigned, subject to such 
modification as may be necessary after consideration of such objections as the parties to the suit may make. 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed— 
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the. . . . . . . .day of . . . . . . . ..., or any later date up to 
which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court shall fined due and the sum of 
Rs...........for the costs of the suit awarded to the plaintiff. 
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount 
as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall bring into Court all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all 
such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff 
shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and 
from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff or any person claiming under him or any person under whom 
he claims and free from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said property. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintiff shall be 
at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree that the defendant shall thenceforth stand absolutely 
debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the schedule 
annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property; and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 3A 
Preliminary Decree for Foreclosure 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 2,—Where the Court declares the amount due.) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this.........day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the plaintiff on his 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this........day of..........is the sum of Rs..........for principal, 
the sum of Rs......for interest on the said principal, the sum of Rs.....for costs, charges and expenses (other 
than the costs of the suit) properly incured by the plaintiff in respect of the mortgage-security, together with 
interest thereon, and the sum of Rs. ........for the costs of this suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all sum 
of Rs. 
196

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:— 
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before for.......day of......or any later date up to which time for 
payment may be extended by the Court of the said sum of Rs......; 
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount 
as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall bring into Court all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all 
such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff 
shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and 
from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff or any person claiming under him or any person under whom 
he claims and free from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said property. 
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default if payment as aforesaid, the plaintiff may apply 
to the Court for a final decree that the defendant shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed 
of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall, 
of so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property; and that the 
parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such 
application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 4 
Final Decree for Foreclosusre 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 3.) 
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree in this suit on the......day of......and further orders (if any) dated 
the.......day of......and the application of the plaintiff dated the.......day of.......for a final decree and after 
hearing the parties and it appearing that the payment directed by the said decree and orders had not been 
made by the defendant or any person on his behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the said 
mortgage; 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the defendant and all persons claiming through or under him be and 
they are hereby absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right of redemption of and in the property 
in the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned; Words not required to be deleted. 
[453][and (if the defendant be in possession of the said mortgaged property) that the defendant shall deliver 
to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said mortgaged property]. 
2. And it is hereby further declared that the whole of the liability whatsoever of the defendant up to this day 
arising from the said mortgage mentioned in the plaint or from this suit is hereby discharged and 
extinguished. 
No. 5 
Preliminary Decree for Sale 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 4—Where accounts are directed to be taken) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this......day, etc,; It is hereby ordered and decree that it be referred to as the 
Commissioner to take the accounts following:— 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the plaintiff for principal and interest on his mortgage mentioned 
in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal or where no such rate is fixed, 
at six per cent, per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable); 
197

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the plaintiff or by any 
other person by the order or for the use of the plaintiff or which without the wilful default of the plaintiff or 
such person night have been se received; 
(iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred by the plaintiff up to this date for costs, charges and 
expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage-security, together with interest thereon 
(such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate, at the same rate 
as is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent. per annum); 
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any act or 
omission of the plaintiff which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the property or by his failure to 
perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or by the terms of the 
mortgage-deed. 
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause (ii) or adjudged due 
under clause (iv) above, together with interest thereon, shall first be adjusted against any sums paid by the 
plaintiff under clause (iii), together with interest thereon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to the 
mortgage-money or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the plaintiff on 
account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal. 
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court with all 
convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before the.......day of......., and that upon report of 
the Commissioner being received, it shall be confirmed and countersigned, subject to such modification as 
may be necessary after consideration of such objections as the parties to the suit may make. 
4. And it is hereby further order and decreed— 
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the......day of.......or any later date up to which time for 
payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court shall find due and the sum of Rs.......for the 
costs of the suit awarded to the plaintiff; 
(ii) that on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount 
as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit, and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall bring into Court all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all 
such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff 
shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer the said property free from the mortgage and clear of and from 
all incumbrances created by the plaintiff or any person claiming under him or any person under whom he 
claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintiff may 
apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such application being 
made the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the purposes of 
such sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court, or such officer as it appoints, all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property. 
6. And it is hereby further order and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court 
and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the amount 
payable to the plaintiff under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this suit and in 
payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the plaintiff in respect of such costs of the suit, 
and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent 
interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to 
receive the same. 
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient 
or payment in full of the amount payable to the plaintiff as aforesaid, the plaintiff shall be at liberty (where 
such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law for the time being 
in force) to apply for a personal decree against the defendant for the amount of the balance; and that the 
198

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
         
 
 
 
 
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such 
application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property. 
No. 5A 
Preliminary Decree for Sale 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 4,—When the Court declares the amount date.) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this. . . . . . . . . .day etc; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the plaintiff on the 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this. . . . . . . . . . . . .day of. . . . . . . . . .is the sum of Rs. . . . 
. . . . . for principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . for interest on the said principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . 
. for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) properly incurred by the plaintiff in respect 
of the mortgage-security, together with interest thereon, and the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . for the costs of the 
suit awarded to the plaintiff, making in all the sum of Rs. 
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:— 
(i) that the defendant do pay into Court on or before the. . . . . . . . . . . .day of. . . . . . . . . or any later date up 
to which time for payment may be extended by the Court, the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . .; 
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount 
as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such cost, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff shall bring into Court all 
documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all 
such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant, or to such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff 
shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and 
from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff or any person claiming under him or any person under whom 
he claims and shall, if so- required deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
property. 
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, it default of payment as aforesaid, the plaintiff may apply 
to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged-property; and on such application being made, 
the mortgaged property or a sufficeint part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the purposes of such 
sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints all documents in his possession 
of power relating to the mortgaged property. 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court 
and shall be duly applied (after deduction herefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the amount 
payable to the plaintiff under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this suit and in 
payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the plaintiff in respect of such costs of the suit, 
and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent 
interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to 
received the same. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale such not be sufficient 
for payment in full of the amount payable to the plaintiff as aforesaid, the plaintiff shall be at liberty (where 
such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred buy any law for the time being 
in force) to apply for a personal decree against the defendant for the amount of the balance; and that the 
parties are at liberty to apply to the court from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such 
application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 6 
199

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
         
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
        
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Final Decree for Sale 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 5) 
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree passed in this suit on the. . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . and further orders 
(if any) dated the. . . . . . . . . .day of. . . . . . . . . .and the application of the plaintiff dated the. . . . . . . . . day of. 
. . . . . . . . .for a final decreed and after hearing the parties and it appearing that the payment directed by the 
said decree and orders has not been made by the defendant or any person on his behalf or any other person 
entitled to redeem the mortgage; 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the mortgaged property in the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned 
or a sufficient part thereof be sold, and that for the purposes of such sale the plaintiff shall produce before 
the Court or such officer as it appoints all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
property. 
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into the 
Court and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the 
amount payable to the plaintiff under the aforesaid preliminary decree and under any further orders that may 
have been passed in this suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may have adjudged due to the 
plaintiff for such costs of the suit including the costs of this application and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and that the 
balance, if any, shall be paid to the defendant or other persons entitled to receive the same. 
No. 7 
Preliminary Decree for Redemption where on Default of Payment by Mortgagor a Decree for Foreclosure is 
Passed 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 7.—Where accounts are directed to be taken.) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this. . . . . . . . . day, etc.; It is hereby ordered and decreed that it be referred to as the 
Commissioner to take the account following:— 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the defendant for principal and interest on the mortgage 
mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payable on the principal or where no such 
rate is fixed, at six per cent per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable); 
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the defendant or by any 
other person by order or for the use of the defendant or which without the wilful default of the defendant or 
such person might have been so received; 
(iii) an account of all sums of money properly incurred by the defendant up to this date for costs, charges and 
expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage-security together with interest thereon 
(such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate, at the same rate 
as it payable on the principal, or, failing both such rate, at nine per cent per annum); 
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any act or 
omission of the defendant which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the property or by his failure to 
perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or by the term of the 
mortgage-deed. 
2. It is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause (ii) or adjudged due under 
caluse (iv) above, together with interest thereon, shall be adjusted against any sums paid by the defendant 
under clause (iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to the mortgage-
money, or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the defendant on account of 
interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the principal. 
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court with all 
conveninent despatch after making all just allowances on or before the. . . . . . . . . .day of. . . . . . . . . and that 
upon such report of the Commissioner being received, it shall be confirmed and countersigend, subject to 
200

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
      
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
such modification as may be necessary after consideration of such objections as the parties to the suit may 
make. 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed— 
(i) that the plaintiff to pay into Court on or before the. . . . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . , or any later date up to 
which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court shall find due and the sum of 
Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant; 
(ii) that, on such payment, and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount 
as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the defendant shall bring into Court 
all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all 
such documents shall be delivered over the the plaintiff, or to such person as he appoints, and the defendant 
shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and 
from all incumbrances created by the defendant or any person claiming under him or any person under 
whom he claims and free from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so 
required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant shall 
be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree that the plaintiff shall thenceforth stand absolutely 
debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule 
annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the 
said property; and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have 
occasion, and on such application or otherswise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 7A 
Preliminary Decree for Redemption where on Default of Payment by Mortgagor a Decree for Sale is Passed 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 7.—Where accounts are directed to be taken.) 
(Tile) 
This suit coming on this . . . . . . . . . . . . .day, etc.; It is herby ordered and decreed that it be referred to . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . as the Commissioner to take the accounts following:— 
(i) an account of what is due on this date to the defendant for principal and interest on the mortgage 
mentioned in the plaint (such interest to be computed at the rate payble on the principal or where no such 
rate is fixed, at six per cent per annum or at such rate as the Court deems reasonable); 
(ii) an account of the income of the mortgaged property received up to this date by the defendant or by any 
other person by the order or for the use of the defendant or which without the wilful default of the defendant 
or such person might have been so received; 
(iii) an account of all sums of money property incurred by the defendant upto this date for costs, charges and 
expenses (other than the costs of the suit) in respect of the mortgage-security together with interest thereon 
(such interest to be computed at the rate agreed between the parties, or, failing such rate, at the same rate 
as is payable on the principal, or, failing both such rates, at nine per cent per annum); 
(iv) an account of any loss or damage caused to the mortgaged property before this date by any act or 
ommission of the defendant which is destructive of, or permanently injurious to, the property or by his failure 
to perform any of the duties imposed upon him by any law for the time being in force or by the terms of the 
mortgaged-deed. 
2. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that any amount received under clause (ii) or adjudged due 
under clause (iv) above, together with interest thereon, shall first be adjusted against any sums paid by the 
defendant under clause (iii) together with interest thereon, and the balance, if any, shall be added to the 
mortgage-money, or, as the case may be, be debited in reduction of the amount due to the defendant on 
account of interest on the principal sum adjudged due and thereafter in reduction or discharge of the 
principal. 
201

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
              
           
     
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. And it is hereby further ordered that the said Commissioner shall present the account to this Court with all 
convenient despatch after making all just allowances on or before the. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . . . . 
.and that, upon such report of the Commissioner being received, it shall be confirmed and countersigned, 
subject to such modification as may be necessary after consideration of such objections as the parties to the 
suit may make. 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed— 
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the. . . . . . . . . .day. . . . . . . . . .of or any later date up to 
which time for payment may be extended by the Court, such sum as the Court shall find due and the sum of 
Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant; 
(ii) that, or such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount 
as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the defendant shall bring into Court 
all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all 
such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff, or to such person as he appoints, and the defendant 
shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and 
from all incumbrances created by the defendant or any person claiming under him or any person under 
whom the claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the 
said property. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant may 
apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such application being 
made, the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the purpose of 
such sale the defendant shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property. 
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court 
and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the amount 
payable to the defendant under this decree and under any further orders that may be passed in this suit and 
in payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the defendant in respect of such costs of the 
suit and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent 
interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons entitled to receive 
the same. 
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient 
for payment in full of the amount payable to the defendant as aforesaid, the defendant shall be at liberty 
(where such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law for the time 
being in force) to apply for a personal decree against the plaintiff for the amount of the balance; and that the 
parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such 
application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 7B 
Preliminary Decree for Redemption where on Default of Payment by Mortgagor a Decree for Foreclosure is 
Passed 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 7.—Where the Court declares the amount due.) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day, etc.; It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
defendant on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this. . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . is the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for interest on the 
said principal the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the 
suit) properly incurred by the defendant in respect of the mortgage-security together with interest thereon, 
202

 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
              
           
     
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for the costs of the suit awarded to the defendant, making in all the 
sum of Rs. 
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:— 
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the . . . . . . . . . . . . . .day of. . . . . . . , or any later date up to 
which time for payment may be extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . .; 
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount 
as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such cost of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the defendant shall bring into Court 
all documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff, or to such person as he appoints, and the defendant 
shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and 
from all incumbrances created by the defendant or any person claiming under him or any person under 
whom he claims, and free from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so 
required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property. 
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decrees that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant may 
apply to the Court for a final decree that the plaintiff shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and 
foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property described in the schedule annexed hereto 
and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said property; 
and that the parties shall be at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have occasion, and 
on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 7C 
Preliminary Decree for Redemption where on Default of Payment by Mortgagor a Decree for Sale is Passed 
(Order XXXIV, rule 7.—Where the Court declares the amount due.) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day, etc., It is hereby declared that the amount due to the 
defendant on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this. . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . . . 
. . . . is the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for interest on the 
said principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the 
suit) properly incurred by the defendant in respect of mortgage-security together with interest thereon, and 
the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .for the cost of this suit awarded to the defendant, making in all the sum of 
Rs. 
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:— 
(i) that the plaintiff do pay into Court on or before the. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . or any later 
date up to which time the payment may be extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .; 
(ii) that, on such payment and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount 
as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the defendant shall bring into Court 
all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint mentioned, and all 
such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff or such person as he appoints, and the defendant 
shall, if so required, reconvey or re-transfer the said property to the plaintiff free from the said mortgage and 
clear of and from all incumbrances created by the defendant or any person claiming under him or any person 
under whom he claims and shall, if so required, deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of 
the said property. 
3. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, the defendant may 
apply to the Court for a final decree for the sale of the mortgaged property; and on such application being 
made, the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and for the purposes of 
203

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
               
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
               
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
         
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
     
 
         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
such sale the defendant shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property. 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court 
and shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the amount 
payment of any amount which the Court may adjudge due to the defendant in respect of such costs of the 
suit and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent 
interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other persons entitled to the 
same. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient 
for the payment in full of the amount payable to the defendant as aforesaid, the defendant shall be at liberty 
(where such remedy is open to him under the terms of the mortgage and is not barred by any law for the time 
being in force) to apply for a personal decree against the plaintiff for the amount of the balance; and that the 
parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from time to time as they may have occasion, and on such 
application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 7D 
Final Decree for Foreclosure in a Redemption Suit on Default of Payment by Mortgagor 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 8.) 
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree in this suit on the. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . and further 
orders (if any) dated the. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , and the application of the defendant 
dated the. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . for a final decree and after hearing the parties, and it 
appearing that the payment as directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the plaintiff or 
any person on his behalf or any other person entitled to redeem the mortgage ; 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the plaintiff and all person claiming through or under him be and they 
are hereby absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right of redemption of and in the property in 
the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned [454][and (if the plaintiff be in possession of the said mortgaged 
property) that the plaintiff shall deliver to the defendant quiet and peaceable possession of the said 
mortgaged property]. 
2. And it is hereby further declared that the whole of the liability whatsoever of the plaintiff up to this day 
arising from the said mortgage mentioned in the plaint or from this suit is hereby discharge and extinguished. 
No. 7E 
Final Decree for Sale in a Redemption on Suit on Default of Payment by Mortgagor 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 8) 
(Title) 
Upon reading the preliminary decree passed in this suit on the. . . . . . . . . .day of. . . . . . . . . . . . .and further 
order (if any) dated the. . . . . . . . . .day of. . . . . . . . . . . . ., and the application of the defendant dated the. . . . 
. . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . .for a final decree and after hearing the parties and it appearing that the payment 
directed by the said decree and orders has not been made by the plaintiff or any person on his behalf or any 
other person entitled to redeem the mortgage; 
It is hereby ordered and decreed that the mortgaged property in the aforesaid preliminary decree mentioned 
or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes of such sale the defendant shall produce before 
the Court, or such officer as it appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged 
property. 
204

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
            
            
 
 
      
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
      
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court and 
shall be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in payment of the amount 
payable to the defendant under the aforesaid preliminary decree and under any further orders that may have 
been passed in this suit and in payment of any amount which the Court may have adjudged due to the 
defendant for such costs of this suit including the costs of this application and such costs, charges and 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with the subsequent interest as may be payable under 
rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if 
any, shall be paid to the plaintiff or other person entitled to receive the same. 
No. 7F 
Final Decree in a Suit for Foreclosure, Sale or Redemption where the Mortgagor 
Pays the Amount of the Decree 
(Order XXXIV, Rules 3, 5 and 8) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this. . . . . . . . . day for further consideration and it appearing that on the . . . . . . . . . . . 
.day of. . . . . . . . . . . . .the mortgagor or. . . . . ., the same being a person entitled to redeem, has paid into 
Court all amounts due to the mortgagee under the preliminary decree dated the. . . . . . .day of. . . . . . .; It is 
hereby ordered and decreed that:— 
(i) the mortgagee do execute a deed of re-conveyance of the property in the aforesaid preliminary decree 
mentioned in favour of the mortgagor [455][or, as the case may be,. . . . . . . . . who has redeemed the 
property] or an acknowledgment of the payment of the amount due in his favour; 
(ii) the mortgagee do bring into Court all documents in his possession and power relating to the mortgaged 
property in the suit. 
And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, upon the mortgagee executing the deed of re-conveyance 
or acknowledgment in the manner aforesaid,— 
(i) the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . be paid out of Court to the mortgagee; 
(ii) the said deeds and documents brought into the Court be delivered out of Court to the mortgagor [456][or 
the person making the payment] and the mortgagee do, when so required, concur in registering, at the cost 
of the mortgagor [457][or other person making the payment], the said deed of re-conveyance or the 
acknowledgment in the officer of the Sub-registrar of. . . . . . . . . ; and 
(iii) [458][if the mortgagee, plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be, is in possession of the mortgaged 
property] that the mortgagee do forthwith deliver possession of the mortgaged property in the aforesaid 
preliminary decree mentioned to the mortgagor [459][or such person as aforesaid who has made the 
payment.] 
No. 8 
Decree against Mortgagor Personally for Balance after the Sale of the 
Mortgaged Property 
(Order XXXIV, Rules 6 and 8A) 
(Title) 
Upon reading the application of the mortgagee (the plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be) and reading 
the final decree passed in the suit on the. . . . . . .day of. . . . . . . . . and the Court being satisfied that the net 
proceeds of the sale held under the aforesaid final decree amounted to Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . and have 
been paid to the applicant out of the Court on the day of. . . . . . and that the balance now due to him under 
the aforesaid decree of Rs. . . . . . .; 
And whereas it appears to the Court that the said sum is legally recoverable from the mortgagor (plaintiff or 
defendant, as the case may be) personally; 
It is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:— 
205

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
That the mortgagor (plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be) do pay to the mortgagee (defendant or 
plaintiff, as the case may be) the said sum of Rs. . . . . . with further interest at the rate of six per cent per 
annum from the. . . . . . .day of. . . . . . (the date of payment out of Court referred to above) up to the date of 
realisation of the said sum, and the costs of this application. 
No. 9 
Preliminary Decree for Foreclousre of Sale 
[Plaintiff 1st Mortgagee, 
vs. 
Defendant No. 1 Mortgagor, 
Defendant No. 2 2nd Mortgagee.] 
(Order XXXIV, Rules 2 and 4) 
(Title) 
The suit coming on this . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . day, etc; It is hereby declared that the amount due to 
the plaintiff on the mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this day of. . . . . . . . . . . . . is the sum of 
Rs. . . . . . for principal, the sum of Rs. . . .for interest on the said principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . .for 
costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs of the suit) incurred by the plaintiff in respect of the 
mortgage-security with interest thereon and the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . .for the costs of this suit awarded to 
the plaintiff, making in all the sum of Rs. . . . . . . 
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due to defendant No. 2 in respect of his 
mortgage if the mortgage-money due thereunder has become payable at the date of the suit.) 
2. It is further declared that the plaintiff is entitled to payment of the amount due to him in priority to 
defendant No. 2 [460][or (if there are several subsequent mortgagees) that the several parties hereto are 
entitle in the following order to the payment of the sums due to them respectively;—] 
3. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:— 
(i) (a) that defendants or one of them do pay into Court on or before the day of . . . . . . . . . or any later date 
up to which time for payment has been extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . .due to the 
plaintiff; and 
(b) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before the day of. . . . . . or any later date up to which time 
for payment has been extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. . . . . . .due to defendant No. 2; and 
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared to be due to the plaintiff be defendant or either of them in the 
manner prescribed in clause (i)(a) and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix and such 
expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable shall 
bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the plaint 
mentioned, and shall all such documents shall be delivered over to the defendant No. . . . . . (who has made 
the payment), or to such person as he appoints, and the plaintiff shall, if so required, re-convey or re-transfer 
the said property free from the said mortgagee and clear of and from all incumbrances created by the plaintiff 
or any person claiming under him or any person under whom he claims, and also free from all liability 
whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to the defendant No. . . . 
(who has made the payment) quiet and peaceable possession of the said property. 
(Similar declarations to be introduced, if defendant No. 1 pays the amount found or declared to be due to 
defendant No. 2 with such variations as may be necessary having regard to the nature of his mortgage.) 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid of the amount due to 
the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree— 
(i)[461] [in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage where the only remedy 
provided for in the mortgage-deed is foreclosure and not sale] that the defendants jointly and severally shall 
thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the mortgaged property 
206

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall, if so required, deliver to the plaintiff quiet and 
peaceable possession of the said property; or 
(ii) [462][in the case of any other mortgage] that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be 
sold; and that for the purposes of such sale the plaintiff shall produce before Court or such officer as it 
appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property; and 
(iii) [463][in the case where a sale is ordered under clause (4) (ii) above] that the money realised by such 
sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in 
payment of the amount payable to the plaintiff under this decree and under any further orders that may have 
been passed in this suit and in payment of the amount which the Court may adjudge due to the plaintiff in 
respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, 
together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First 
Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any, shall be applied in payment of 
the amount due to defendant No. 2, and that if any balance be left, it shall be paid to the defendant No. 1 or 
other persons entitled to receive the same; and 
(iv) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the amounts due to 
the plaintiff and defendant No. 2, the plaintiff or defendant No. 2 or both of them, as the case may be, shall 
be at liberty (when such remedy is open under the terms of their respective mortgages and is not barred by 
any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against defendant No. 1 for the amounts 
remaining due to them respectively. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed— 
(a) that if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of this suit the amount adjudged due to the plaintiff, 
but defendant No. 1 makes default in the payment of the said amount, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty to 
apply to the Court to keep the plaintiff's mortgage alive for his benefit and to apply for a final decree (in the 
same manner as the plaintiff might have done under clause 4 above)— 
[464] [(i) that defendant No. 1 shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right 
to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to defendant No. 2 quiet and peaceable possession of the said property;] or 
[465][(ii) that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes of such 
sale defendant No. 2 shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all documents in his 
possession or power relating to the mortgaged property;] and 
(b) (if on the application of defendant No. 2 such a final decree for foreclosure is passed), that the whole of 
the liability of defendant No. 1 arising from the plaintiff's mortgage or from the mortgage of defendant No. 2 
or from this suit shall be deemed to have been discharged and extinguished. 
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed [466][in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 5 
above]— 
(i) that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after deduction 
therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the amount paid by defendant No. 2 in respect of 
the plaintiff's mortgage and the costs of the suit in connection therewith and in payment of the amount which 
the Court may adjudge due in respect of subsequent interest on the said amount; and that the balance, if 
any, shall then be applied in payment of the amount adjudged due to defendant No. 2 in respect of his own 
mortgage under this decree and any further orders that may be passed and in payment of the amount which 
the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of this suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable to defendant No. 2 under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 1, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the 
balance, if any, shall be paid to defendant No. 1 or other persons entitled to receive the same; and 
(ii) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the amount due in 
respect of the plaintiff's mortgage or defendant No. 2's mortgage, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty (where 
such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law for the time being 
in force) to apply for a personal decree against No. 1 for the amount of the balance. 
207

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
      
       
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from time 
to time as they may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions 
as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 10 
Preliminary Decree for Redemption of Prior Mortgage and Foreclosure of Sale on 
Subsequent Mortgage 
[Plaintiff 1st Mortgagee, 
vs 
Defendant No. 1 Mortgagor 
Defendant No. 2 2nd Mortgagee.] 
(Order XXXIV, rules 2, 4 and 7) 
(Title) 
The suit coming on this. . . . . . day, etc; It is hereby declared that the amount due to defendant No. 2 on the 
mortgage mentioned in the plaint calculated up to this. . . . . . day of. . . . . . is the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . for 
principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . for interest on the said principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . .for costs, charges and 
expenses (other than the costs of the suit) property incurred by defendant No. 2 in respect of the mortgage-
security with interest thereon and the sum of Rs. . . for the costs of this suit awarded to defendant No. 2, 
making in all the sum of Rs. 
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due from defendant No. 1 to the plaintiff in 
respect of his mortgage if the mortgage-money due thereunder has become payable at the date of the suit.) 
2. It is further declared that defendant No. 2 is entitled to payment of the amount due to him in priority to the 
plaintiff [467][or (if there are several subsequent mortgagees) that the several parties hereto are entitled in 
the following order to the payment of the sums due to them respectively:—]. 
3. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:— 
(i)(a) that the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 or one of them do pay into Court on or before the. . . . . . day of. . . . 
. . or any later date up to which time for payment has been extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. . . . . . 
due to defendant No. 2; and 
(b) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before the. . . . . . .day of. . . . . . or any later date up to which 
time for payment has been extended by the Court the said sum of. Rs. . . . . . .due to the plaintiff; and 
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared due to defendant No. 2 by the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 or either 
of them in the manner prescribed in clause (i) (a) and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court 
may fix of such amount as the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, 
charges and expenses as may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be 
payable under rule 11, or Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, defendant 
No. 2 shall bring into Court all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in 
the plaint mentioned, and all such documents shall be delivered over to the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 
(whoever has made the payment), or to such person as he appoints, and defendant No. 2 shall, if so 
required, re-convey or re-transfer the said property free from the said mortgage and clear of and from all 
incumbrances created by defendant No. 2 or any person claiming under him or any person under whom he 
claims, and also free from all liability whatsoever arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so 
required, deliver up to the plaintiff or defendant No. 1 (whoever has made the payment) quiet and peaceable 
possession of the said property. 
(Similar declarations to be introduced, if defendant No. 1 pays the amount found or declared due to the 
plaintiff with such variations as may be necessary having regard to the nature of his mortgage.) 
208

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment as aforesaid, of the amount due to 
defendant No. 2, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty to apply to the Court that the suit be dismissed or for a 
final decree— 
(i) [468][in the case of a mortgage by conditional sale or an anomalous mortgage where the only remedy 
provided for in the mortgage-deed is foreclosure and not sale] that the plaintiff and defendant No. 1 jointly 
and severally shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right to redeem the 
mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall; if so required, deliver to the 
defendant No. 2 quiet and peaceable possession of the said property; or 
(ii) [469][in the case of any other mortgage] that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be 
sold; and that for the purposes of such sale defendant No. 2 shall produce before the Court or such officer as 
it appoints, all documents in his possession or power relating to the mortgaged property; and 
(iii) [470][in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 4(ii) above] that the money realised by such sale 
shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) in 
payment of the amount payable to defendant No. 2 under the decree and any further orders that may be 
passed in this suit and in payment of the amount which the Court may adjudge due to defendant No. 2 in 
respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as may be payable to the plaintiff 
under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, or Order XXXIV of 
the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and that the balance, if any, shall be applied in 
payment of the amount due to the plaintiff and that, if any balance be left, it shall be paid to defendant No. 1 
or other persons entitled to receive the same; and 
(iv) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the amounts due to 
defendant No. 2 and the plaintiff, defendant No. 2 or the plaintiff or both of them, as the case may be, shall 
be at liberty (when such remedy is open under the terms of their respective mortgages and is not barred by 
any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against defendant No. 1 for the amounts 
remaining due to them respectively. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed,— 
(a) that, if the plaintiff pays into Court to the credit of this suit the amount adjudged due to defendant No. 2 
but defendant No. 1 makes default in the payment of the said amount, the plaintiff shall be at liberty to apply 
to the Court to keep defendant No. 2's mortgage alive for his benefit and to apply for a final decree (in the 
same manner as the defendant No. 2 might have done under clause 4 above)— 
[471][(i) that defendant No.1 shall thenceforth stand absolutely debarred and foreclosed of and from all right 
to redeem the mortgaged property described in the Schedule annexed hereto and shall, if so required, 
deliver up to the plaintiff quiet and peaceable possession of the said property]; or 
[472][(ii) that the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof be sold and that for the purposes of such 
sale the plaintiff shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all documents in his possession 
or power relating to the mortgage property;] and 
(b) (if on the application of defendant No. 2 such a final decree for foreclosure is passed), that the whole of 
the liability of defendant No. 1 arising from the plaintiff's mortgage or from the mortgage of defendant No. 2 
or from this suit shall be deemed to have been discharged and extinguished. 
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed (in the case where a sale is ordered under clause 5 above)— 
(i) that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly applied (after deduction 
therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the amount paid by the plaintiff in respect of 
defendant No. 2's mortgage and the costs of the suit in connection therewith and in payment of the amount 
which the Court may adjudge due in respect of subsequent interest on the said amount; and that the 
balance, if any, shall then be applied in payment of the amount adjudged due to the plaintiff in respect of his 
own mortgage under this decree and any further orders that may be passed and in payment of the amount 
which the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses 
as may be payable to the plaintiff under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable 
under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the 
balance, if any, shall be paid to defendant No. 1 or other persons entitled to receive the same; and 
209

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
       
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be sufficient for payment in full of the amount due in 
respect of the defendant No. 2's mortgage or the plaintiff's mortgage, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty 
(where such remedy is open to him under the terms of his mortgage and is not barred by any law for the time 
being in force) to apply for a personal decree against defendant No. 1 for the amount of the balance. 
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court from time 
to time as they may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions 
as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 11 
Preliminary Decree for Sale 
[Plaintiff Sub or derivative mortgage 
vs. 
Defendant No. 1 Mortgagor, 
Defendant No. 2 Original Mortgagee.] 
(Order XXXIV, Rule 4) 
(Title) 
This suit coming on this. . . . . . . . . day, etc; It is hereby declared that the amount due to defendant No. 2 on 
his mortgage calculated up to this. . . . . . day of. . . . . . is the sum of Rs. . . for principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . 
for interest on the said principal, the sum of Rs. . . . . . for costs, charges and expenses (other than the costs 
of the suit) in respect of the mortgage-security together with interest thereon and the sum of Rs. . . . . . for the 
costs of the suit awarded to defendant No. 2, making in all the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due from defendant No. 2 to the plaintiff in 
respect of his mortgage.) 
2. And it is hereby ordered and decreed as follows:— 
(i) that defendant No. 1 do pay into Court on or before th said. . . .day of. . . . . . or any later date of up to 
which time for payment may be extended by the Court the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . due to defendant No. 2; 
(Similar declarations to be introduced with regard to the amount due to the plaintiff, defendant No. 2 being at 
liberty to pay such amount.) 
(ii) that, on payment of the sum declared due to defendant No. 2 by defendant No. 1 in the manner 
prescribed in clause 2(i) and on payment thereafter before such date as the Court may fix of such amount as 
the Court may adjudge due in respect of such costs of the suit and such costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, or 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the plaintiff and defendant No. 2 
shall bring into Court all documents in their possession or power relating to the mortgaged property in the 
plaint mentioned, and all such documents (except such as relate only to the sub-mortgage) shall be delivered 
over to defendant No. 1, or to such person as he appoints, and defendant No. 2 shall, if so required, re­
convey or re-transfer the property to defendant No. 1 free from the said mortgage clear of and from all 
incumbrances created by defendant No. 2 or any person claiming under him or any person under whom he 
claims, and free from all liability arising from the mortgage or this suit and shall, if so required, deliver up to 
defendant No. 1 quiet and peaceable possession of the said property; and 
(iii) that, upon payment into the Court by defendant No. 1 of the amount due to defendant No. 2 the plaintiff 
shall be at liberty to apply for payment to him of the sum declared due to him together with any subsequent 
costs of the suit and other costs, charges and expenses, as may be payable under rule 10, together with 
such subsequent interests as may be payable under rule 11, of Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and that the balance, if any, shall then be paid to defendant No. 2; and that if 
the amount paid into the Court be not sufficient to pay in full the sum due to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall be 
210

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
       
 
         
       
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
               
 
       
   
      
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
at liberty (if such remedy is open to him by the terms of the mortgage and is not barred by any law for the 
time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against defendant No. 2 for the amount of the balance. 
3. And it is further ordered and decreed that if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of this suit the 
amount adjudged due to the plaintiff, the plaintiff shall bring into the Court all documents, etc, [as in sub-
clause (ii) of the clause 2.]. 
4. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, in default of payment by defendant Nos. 1 and 2 as 
aforesaid, the plaintiff may apply to the Court for a final decree for sale, and on such application being made 
the mortgaged property or a sufficient part thereof shall be directed to be sold; and that for the purposes of 
such sale the plaintiff and defendant No. 2 shall produce before the Court or such officer as it appoints, all 
documents in their possession or power relating to the mortgaged property. 
5. And it is hereby further ordered that the money realised by such sale shall be paid into Court and be duly 
applied (after deduction therefrom of the expenses of the sale) first in payment of the amount due to the 
plaintiff as specified in clause 1 above with such costs of the suit and other costs, charges and expenses as 
may be payable under rule 10, together with such subsequent interest as may be payable under rule 11, of 
Order XXXIV of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, and that the balance, if any shall be 
applied in payment of the amount due to defendant No. 2; and that, if any balance be left, it shall be paid to 
defendant No.1 or other persons entitled to receive the same. 
6. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if the money realised by such sale shall not be; sufficient 
for payment in full of the amounts payable to the plaintiff and defendant No. 2, the plaintiff or defendant No. 
2, or both of them, as the case may be, shall be at liberty (if such remedy is open under their respective 
mortgages and is not barred by any law for the time being in force) to apply for a personal decree against 
defendant No. 2 or defendant No. 1 (as the case may be) for the amount of the balance. 
7. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that, if defendant No. 2 pays into Court to the credit of this 
suit the amount adjudged due to the plaintiff, but defendant No. 1 makes default in payment of the amount 
due to defendant No. 2, defendant No. 2 shall be at liberty to apply to the Court for a final decree for 
foreclosure or sale (as the case may)—(declarations in the ordinary form to be introduced according to the 
nature of defendant No. 2's morgage and the remedies open to him thereunder). 
8. And it is hereby further ordered and decreed that the parties are at liberty to apply to the Court as they 
may have occasion, and on such application or otherwise the Court may give such directions as it thinks fit. 
Schedule 
Description of the mortgaged property 
No. 12 
Decree for Rectification of Instrument 
(Title) 
It is hereby declared that the. . . . . . , dated the. . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . 19. . . . ., does not truly express the 
intention of the parties to such 
And it is decreed that the said. . . . . . rectified by 
No. 13 
DECREE TO SET ASIDE A TRANSFER IN FRAUD OF CREDITORS 
(Title) 
It is hereby declared that the. . . . . . , . . . . . . . . dated the . . . . . . .day of. . . .19. . . . . ., and made between 
and. . . . . . is void as against the plaintiff and all other the creditors, if any, of the defendant 
No. 14 
Injunction Against Private Nuisance 
(Title) 
211

 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
      
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Let the defendant. . . . . . , his agents, servants and workmen, be perpetually restrained from burning, or 
causing to be burnt, any bricks on the defendant's plot of land marked B in the annexed plan, so as to 
occasion a nuisance to the plaintiff as the owner or occupier of the dwelling-house and garden mentioned in 
the plaint a belonging to and being occupied by the plaintiff. 
No. 15 
Injunction against Building Higher than Old Level 
(Title) 
Let the defendant. . . ., his contractors, agents and workmen, be perpetually restrained from continuing to 
erect upon his premises in. . . . . . any house or building of a greater height than the buildings which formerly 
stood upon his said premises and which have been recently pulled down, so or in such manner as to darken, 
injure or obstruct such of the plaintiff's windows in his said premises as are ancient lights. 
No. 16 
Injunction Restraining Use of Private Road 
(Title) 
Let the defendant. . . . . . . . . , his agents, servants and workmen, be perpetually restrained from using or 
permitting to be used any part of the lane at. . . . . . . . . , the soil of which belongs to the plaintiff, as a 
carriage-way for the passage of carts, carriages or other vehicles, either going to or from the land marked B 
in the annexed plan or for any purpose whatsoever. 
No. 17 
Preliminary Decree in an Administration-Suit 
(Title) 
It is ordered that the following accounts and inquiries be taken and made; that is to say— 
In creditor's suit— 
1. That an account be taken of what is due to the plaintiff and all other the creditors of the deceased. 
In suits by legatees— 
2. That an accounts be taken of the legacies given by the testator's will, 
In suits by next-of-kin— 
3. That an inquiry be made and account taken of what or of what share, if any, the plaintiff is entitled to as 
next-of-kin [or one of the next-of-kin] of the intestate. 
[After the first paragraph, the decree will, where necessary, order, in a creditor's suit, inquiry and accounts for 
legatees, heirs-at-law and next-of-kin. In suits by claimants other than creditors, after the first paragraph, in 
all cases, an order to inquire and take an account of creditors will follow the first paragraph and such of the 
others as may be necessary will follow, omitting the first formal words. The form is continued as in a 
creditor's suit.] 
4. An account of the funeral and testamentary expenses. 
5. An account of the movable property of the deceased come to the hands of the defendant, or to the hands 
of any other person by his order or for his use. 
6. An inquiry what part (if any) of the movable property of the deceased is outstanding and undisposed of. 
7. And it is further ordered that the defendant do, on or before the. . . . . . day of. . . . . . next, pay into, Court 
all sums of money which shall be found to have come to his hands, or to the hands of any person by his 
order or for his use. 
8. And that if the. . . . . . [473]shall find it necessary for carrying out the objects of the suit to sell any part of 
the movable property of the deceased that the same be sold accordingly, and the proceeds paid into Court. 
212

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
        
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
      
       
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
   
      
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
      
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. And that Mr. E.F. be receiver in the suit (or proceeding) and receive and get in all outstanding debts and 
outstanding movable property of the deceased, and pay the same into the hands of the . . . . . . 1(and shall 
give security by bond for the due performance of his duties to the amount. . . . . . . . . .rupees) 
10. And it is further ordered that if the movable property of the deceased be found insufficient for carrying out 
the objects of the suit, then the following further inquiries be made, and accounts taken, that is to say— 
(a) an inquiry what immovable property the deceased was seized of or entitled to at the time of his death; 
(b) an inquiry what are the incumbrances (if any) affecting the immovable property of the deceased or any 
part thereof; 
(c) an account, so far as possible, of what is due to the several incumbrancers, and to include a statement of 
the priorities of such of the incumbrancers as shall consent to the sale hereinafter directed. 
11. And that the immovable property of the deceased, or so much thereof as shall be necessary to make up 
the fund in Court sufficient to carry out the object of the suit, be sold with the approbation of the Judge, free 
from incumbrances (if any) of such incumbrancers as shall consent to the sale and subject to the 
incumbrances of such of them as shall not consent. 
12. And it is ordered that G.H. shall have the conduct of the sale of the immovable property, and shall 
prepare the conditioins and contacts of sale subject to the approval of the. . . . . .[474] and that in case any 
doubt or difficulty shall arise the papers shall be submitted to the Judge to settle. 
13. And it is further ordered that, for the purpose of the inquiries hereinbefore directed, . . the . . . . . . . 1.shall 
advertise in the newspapers according to the practice of the Court, or shall make such inquiries in any other 
way which shall appear to the . . . . . . . . .1to give the most useful publicity to such inquiries. 
14. And it is ordered that the above inquiries and accounts be made and taken, and that all other acts 
ordered to be done be completed, before the day of . . . . . . . and that the . . . . . . . .1do certify the result of 
the injuries, and the accounts, and that all other acts ordered are completed, and have his certificate in that 
behalf ready for the inspection of the parties on the day of 
15. And, lastly, it is ordered that this suit [or proceedings] stand adjourned for making final decree to the day 
of 
[Such part only of this decree is to be used as is applicable to the particular case.] 
No. 18 
Final Decree in an Administration-Suit by a Legatee 
(Title) 
1. It is ordered that the defendant. . . .do, on or before the. . . . . . .day of. . . . . . ., pay into Court the sum of 
Rs. . . . . . ., the balance by the said certificate found to be due from the said defendant on account of the 
estate of. . . . . . . . . . . ., the testator and also the sum of Rs. . . . . . for interest, at the rate of Rs. . . . . . .per 
cent per annum, from the. . . .day of. . . . . . to the. . . .day of. . . ., amounting together to the sum of Rs. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
2. Let the. . . . . . . . . 1 of the said Court tax the costs of the plaintiff and defendant in this suit, and let the 
amount of the said costs, when so taxed, be paid out of the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . ordered to be paid 
into Court as aforesaid, as follows:— 
(a) The costs of the plaintiff to Mr. . . . . . ., his attorney [or pleader] or and the costs of the defendant to Mr. . . 
. . . , his attorney [or pleader]. 
(b) And (if any debts are due) with the residue of the said sum of Rs. . . . . . after payment of the plaintiff's 
and defendant's costs as aforesaid let the sums, found to be owing to the several creditors mentioned in the,. 
. . . . . .schedule to the certificate, of the. . . . . . .1 together with subsequent interest on such of the debts as 
bear interest, be paid; and, after making such payments, let the amount coming to the several legatees 
mentioned in the schedule, together with subsequent interest (to be verified as aforesaid), be paid to them. 
3. And if there should then be any residue, let the same be paid to the residuary legatee. 
No. 19 
213

 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
       
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Preliminary Decree in an Administration-Suit by a Legatee, where an Executor is held Personally Liable for 
the Payment of Legacies 
(Title) 
1. It is declared that the defendant is personally liable to pay the legacy of Rs. . . . . . bequeathed to the 
plaintiff. 
2. And it is ordered that an account be taken of what is due for principal and interest on the said legacy. 
3. And it is also ordered that the defendant do, within. . . .weeks after date of the certificate of the. . . . . . 
[475] pay to the plaintiff the amount of what the. . . . . . shall certify to be due for principal and interest. 
4. And it is ordered that the defendant do pay the plaintiff his cost of suit, the same to be taxed in case the 
parties differ. 
No. 20 
Final Decree in an Administration-Suit by Next-of-Kin 
(Title) 
1. Let the. . . . . . .1 of the said Court tax the costs of the plaintiff and defendant in this suit, and let the 
amount of the said plaintiff's costs, when so taxed, be paid by the defendant to the plaintiff out of the sum of 
Rs. . . . . . , the balance by the said certificate found to be due from the said defendant on account of the 
personal estate of E.F., the intestate, within one week after the taxation of the said costs by the said . . . . . . . 
. . 1, and let the defendant retain for her own use out of such sum her costs, when taxed. 
2. And it is ordered that the residue of the said sum of Rs. . . . . . after payment of the plaintiff's and 
defendant's costs as aforesaid, be paid and applied by defendant as follow:— 
(a) Let the defendant, within one week after the taxation of the said costs by the. . . . . . 1as aforesaid, pay 
one-third share of the said residue to the plaintiffs A.B., and C.D., his wife, in her right as the sister and one 
of the next-of-kin of the said E.F., the instestate. 
(b) Let the defendant retain for her own use one other third share of said residue, as the mother and one of 
the next-of-kin of the said E.F., the intestate. 
(c) And let the defendant, within one week after the taxation of the said costs by the . . . . . . . . . .1as 
aforesaid, pay the remaining one-third share of the said residue to G.H., as the brother and the other next-of­
kin of the said E.F., the intestate. 
No. 21 
Preliminary Decree in a Suit for Dissolution of Partnership and the Taking of 
Partnership Accounts 
(Title) 
It is declared that the proportionate shares of the parties in the partnership are as follows:— 
It is declared that this partnership shall stand dissolved [or shall be deemed to have been dissolved] as from 
the. . . .day of. . . . . . ., and it is ordered that the dissolution thereof as from that day be advertised in the . . . . 
. . .Gazette, etc. 
And it is ordered that. . . . . . be the receiver of the partnership-estate and effects in this suit and do get in all 
the outstanding book-debts and claims of the partnership. 
And it is ordered that the following accounts be taken:— 
1. An account of the credits, property and effects now belonging to the said partnership; 
2. An account of the debts and liabilities of the said partnership; 
3. An account of all dealings and transactions between the plaintiff and defendant, from the foot of the settled 
account exhibited in this suit and marked (A), and not disturbing any subsequent settled accounts. 
214

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
       
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
       
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
     
         
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
       
  
 
 
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
And it is ordered that the goodwill of the business heretofore carried on by the plaintiff and defendant as in 
the plaint mentioned, and the stock-in-trade, be sold on the premises, and that the. . . . . . Here insert name 
of proper officer. 
may, on the application of any of the parties, fix a reserved bidding for all or any of the lots at such sale, and 
that either of the parties is to be at liberty to bid at the sale. 
And it is ordered that the above accounts be taken, and all the other acts required to be done be completed, 
before the . . . . . . . . . .day of. . . . . . ., and that the. . . . . . . . . 1 do certify the result of the accounts, and that 
all other acts are completed, and have his certificate in that behalf ready for the inspection of the parties on 
the. . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . 
And, lastly, it is ordered that this suit stand adjourned for making a final decree to the . . . . . . . . . .day of . . . . 
. . . . . . . . . 
No. 22 
Final Decree in a Suit for Dissolution of Partnership and the Taking of 
Partnership Accounts 
(Title) 
It is ordered that the fund now in Court, amounting to the sum of Rs. . . , be; applied as follows:— 
1. In payment of the debts due by the partnership set forth in the certificate of the. . . . . .. . 1amounting in the 
whole to Rs.. . . . . . . . . . . . 
2. In payment of the costs of all parties in this suit, amounting to Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
[These costs must be ascertained before the decree is drawn up.] 
3. In payment of the sum of Rs. . . . . . to the plaintiff as his share of the partnership-assets, of the sum of Rs. 
. . . . . ., being the residue of the said sum of Rs. . . .now in Court to the defendant as his share of the 
partnership-assets. 
[Or, And that, the remainder of the said sum of Rs. . . .be paid to the said plaintiff (or defendant) in part 
payment of the sum of Rs. . . . . . certified to be due to him in respect of the partnership-accounts.] 
4. And that the defendant [or plaintiff] do on or before the. . . .day of. . . . . . pay to the plaintiff [or defendant] 
the sum or Rs. . . . . . being the balance of the said sum of Rs. . . . . . due to him, which will then remain due. 
No. 23 
Decree for Recovery of Land and Mesne Profit 
(Title) 
It is hereby decreed as follows:— 
1. that the defendant do put the plaintiff in possession of the property specified in the schedule hereunto 
annexed. 
2.That the defendant do pay to the plaintiff the sum of Rs. . . .with interest thereon at the rate of. . . . . . .per 
cent per annum to the date of realization on account of mesne profits which have accrued due prior to the 
institution of the suit. 
Or 
2. That an inquiry be made as to the account of mesne profits which have accrued due prior to the institution 
of the suit. 
3. That an inquiry be made as to the amount of mesne profits from the institution of the suit until [the delivery 
of possession to the decree-holder] [the relinquishment of possession by the judgment-debtor with notice to 
the decree -holder through the Court] [the expiration of three years from the date of the decree]. 
Schedule 
215

 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
          
       
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
         
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
        
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
          
 
        
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
        
 
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
        
     
APPENDIX E 
EXECUTION 
No. 1 
Notice to Show Cause Why a Payment or Adjustment should not be Recorded as Certified 
(O 21, R. 2) 
(Title) 
Whereas in execution of the decree in the above-named suit. . . . . . .has applied to this Court that the sum of 
Rs. . . . . . recoverable under the decree has been paid/adjusted and should be recorded as certified, this is 
to give you notice that you are to appear before this Court on the. . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . . . ., to 
o
show cause why the payment/adjustment aforesaid 
should not be recorded as certified. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this. . . . . . .day of 19. 
No. 2 
Precept 
(Section 46) 
(Title) 
Upon hearing the decree-holder it is ordered that this precept be sent to the Court of. . . . . . . . . .at. . . . . . . . . 
. . . under section 46 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, with directions to attach the property specified in 
the annexed schedule and to hold the same pending any application which may be made by the deree­
holder for executive of the decree. 
No. 3 
Order Sending Decree for Execution to another Court 
(O. 21, R. 6) 
(Title) 
Whereas the decree-holder in the above suit has applied to this Court for a certificate to be sent to the Court 
of. . . . . . . . at . . . . . . . for execution of the decree in the above suit by the said Court, alleging that the 
judgment-debtor resides or has property within the local limits, of the jurisdiction of the said Court, and it is 
deemed necessary and proper to send a certificate to the said Court under Order XXI, rule 6, of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, it is 
Ordered : 
That a copy of this order be sent to . . . . . . . . with a copy of the decree and of any order which may have 
been made for execution of the same and a certificate of non-satisfaction. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Judge 
No. 4 
Certificate of Non-Satisfaction of Decree 
(O. 21, R. 6.) 
(Title) 
Certified that no[476] satisfaction of the decree of this Court in suit No. . . . . . . . of 19 . . . ., a copy which is 
hereunto attached, has been obtained by execution within the jurisdiction of this Court. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
216

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Judge 
No. 5 
Certificate of Execution of Decree Transferred to Another Court 
(O. 21, R. 6) 
(Title) 
No of suitn and the Court by which decree was passed 
Name of parties 
Date of application for execution 
Number of the execution case 
Processesissued and dates of services thereof 
Costs of execution 
Amount realized 
How the case is disposed of 
Remarks 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
Rs. 
a. 
p. 
Rs. 
a. 
p. 
Signature of Maharir incharge Signature of Judge 
No. 6 
Application for Execution of Decree 
(O. 21, R. 11) 
In the Court of 
I . . . . . . , decree-holder, hereby apply for execution of the decree herein-below set forth : 
No. of Suit 
217

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Name of parties 
Date of Decree 
Whether any appeal preferred from decree 
Payment of adjustment made, if any 
Previous application, if any, with date and result 
Amount with interest due upon the decree or other relief granted thereby together with particular, of any 
cross decree 
Amount of costs, if any, awarded 
Against whom to be executed 
Mode in which the assistance of the Court is required. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
789 of 1897 
A.B.—Plaintiff 
C.D.—Defendant 
October 11, 1897 
No. 
None. 
Rs.72-4-0 recorded on application dated the 4th March, 1899. 
Rs. 314-8-2 principal[interest at 6 per cent, per annum, from date of decree till payment]. 
Rs. a. p. 
As awarded in the decree 47 10 4 
Subsequently incurred 8 2 0 
Against the defendant C.D. 
[When attachment and sale of movable property is sought.] 
I pray that the total amount of Rs…………[together with interest on the principal sum up to date of payment] 
and the cost of taking out this execution, be realised by attachment and sale of defendant's movable property 
as per annexed list and paid to me. 
[When attachment and sale of immovable property is sought.] 
218

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
          
 
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
           
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
      
 
     
   
 
        
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
               
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
I pray that the total amount of Rs……………[together with interest on the principal sum up to date of 
payment] and the cost of taking out this execution, be realised by attachment and sale of defendant's 
immovable property specified at the foot of this application and paid to me. 
I . . . . . . . declare that what is stated herein is true to the best of my knowledge and belief. 
Signed. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., decree-holder 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
[When attachment and sale of immovable property is sought.] 
Description and specification of property 
The undivided one-third share of the judgment-debtor in a house situated in the village of . . . . . . , value Rs. 
40, and bounded as follows :— 
East by G's house; west by H's house; south by public road; north by private lane and J's house. 
I . . . . . . . declare that what is stated in the above description is true to the best of my knowledge and belief, 
and so far as I have been able to ascertain the interest of the defendant in the property therein specified. 
Signed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , decree-holder 
No. 7 
Notice to Show Cause Why Execution should not Issue 
(O. 21, R. 16) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has made application to this Court for execution of decree in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . . 
of 19 . . . . ., on the allegation that the said decree has transferred to him by assignment [477][or without 
assignment], this is to give you notice that you are to appear before this Court . . . . . . . on the . . . . . . . . . day 
of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., to show cause why execution should not be granted. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 8 
Warrant of Attachment for Movable Property in Execution of a Decree for Money 
(O. 21, R. 30) 
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court, 
Whereas . . . . . . . was ordered by decree of this Court passed on the day of . . . . . . .19 . . . ., in Suit No. . . . . 
. . . of 19 . . . . . . ., to pay to the plaintiff. . . . . . . . . . . . . . the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . as noted in the 
margin; and whereas the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . has not been paid; These are to command you to attach 
the movable property of the said . . . . . . . . . , as set forth in the schedule hereunto annexed, or which shall 
be pointed out to you by the said . . . . . . . ., and unless the said . . . . . . . shall pay to you the said sum of Rs. 
. . . . . . . together with Rs. . . . . . . . , the cost of this attachment, to hold the same until further orders from 
this Court. 
You are further commanded to return this warrant on or before the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., with 
an endorsement certifying the day on which and manner in which it has been executed, or why it has not 
been executed. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
219

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
        
      
 
        
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
        
            
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
        
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
  
      
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Schedule 
Judge. 
Decree 
Principal 
Interest 
Costs 
Further interest 
Total 
No. 9 
Warrant for Seizure of Specific Movable Property Adjudged by Decree 
(O. 21, R. 31) 
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court. 
Whereas . . . . . . . was ordered by decree of this Court passed on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., in 
Suit No. . . . . . . . of 19. . . ., to deliver to the plaintiff the movable property (or a . . . . . . . share in the movable 
property) specified in the schedule hereunto annexed, and whereas the said property (or share) has not 
been delivered. 
These are to command you to seize the said movable property (or a . . . . . . . share of the said movable 
property) and to deliver it to the plaintiff or to such person as he may appoint in this behalf. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Schedule 
Judge 
. 
No. 10 
Notice to State Objection to Draft of Document 
(O. 21, R. 34) 
(Title) 
To 
Take notice that on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., . . . . . . . the decree-holder in the above suit 
presented an application to this Court that the Court may execute on your behalf a deed of . . . . . . ., whereof 
a draft is hereunto annexed, of the immovable property specified hereunder, and that the . . . . . . . . . day of . 
. . . . . . 19 . . . ., is appointed for the hearing of the said application, and that you are at liberty to appear on 
the said day and to state in writing any objections to the said draft. 
Description of property 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Judge. 
No. 11 
Warrant to the Belief to Give Possession of Land, etc. 
220

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
         
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
       
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
      
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
       
 
     
 
        
  
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
(O. 21, R. 35) 
(Title) 
To 
o
The Bailiff of the Court. 
Whereas the undermentioned property in the occupancy of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has been decreed to . . . . . . . , 
the plaintiff in this suit; You are hereby directed to put the said . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in possession of the same, 
and you are hereby authorized to remove any person bound by the decree who may refuse to vacate the 
same. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Schedule 
Judge. 
No. 12 
Notice to Show Cause Why Warrant of Arrest should not Issue 
(O. 21, R. 37) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . has made application to this Court for execution of decree in Suit No. . . . . . ., of 19 . . . . 
., by arrest and imprisonment of your person, you are hereby required to appear before this Court on the . . . 
. . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., to show cause why you should not be committed to the civil prison in 
execution of the said decree. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Judge. 
No. 13 
Warrant of Arrest in Execution 
(O. 21, R. 38) 
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court. 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . was adjudged by a decree of the Court in suit No. . . . . . . of 19 . . . ., dated the . . . . . . . 
. . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., to pay to the decree-holder the sum of Rs. . . . . . . as noted in the margin, and 
whereas the said sum of Rs. . . . . . has not been paid to the said decree-holder in satisfaction of the said 
decree, these are to command you to arrest the said judgment-debtor and unless the said judgment-debtor 
shall pay to you the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . together with Rs. . . . . . . . for the cost of executing this process, 
to bring the said defendant before the Court with all convenient speed. 
You are further commanded to return this warrant on or before the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . .,with an 
endorsement certifying the day on which and manner in which it has been executed, or the reason why it has 
not been executed. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Judge. 
Decree 
Principal 
221

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
     
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
        
 
        
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
  
 
 
             
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest 
Costs 
Execution 
Total 
No. 14 
Warrant of Commital of Judgment-Debtor to Jail 
(O. 21, R. 40) 
(Title) 
To 
The Officer in charge of the Jail at 
Whereas . . . . . . . who has been brought before this Court this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., under a 
warrant in execution of a decree which was made and pronounced by the said Court on the . . . . . . . . . day 
of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., and by which decree it was ordered that the said . . . . . . . should pay . . . . . . . ; And 
whereas the said . . . . . . . has not obeyed the decree nor satisfied the Court that he is entitled to be 
discharged from custody; You are hereby commanded and required to take and receive the said . . . . . . . 
into the civil prison and keep him imprisoned therein for a period not exceeding . . . . . . . or until the said 
decree shall be fully satisfied, or the said . . . . . . . . . . shall be otherwise entitled to be released according to 
terms and provisions of Section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and the Court does hereby fix 
[478]* * * per diem as the rate of the monthly allowance for the subsistence of the said . . . . . . . during his 
confinement under this warrant of committal. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Judge. 
No. 15 
Order for the Release of a Person Imprisoned in Execution of a Decree 
(Sections 58, 59) 
(Title) 
To 
o
The Officer in charge of the Jail at . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Under orders passed this day, you are hereby directed to set free . . . . . . . judgment-debtor now in your 
custody. 
dated. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 16 
Attachment in Execution Prohibitory Order, where the Property to be 
Attached Consists of Movable Property to which the Defendant is 
Entitled Subject to a lien or Right of some other Person to the 
Immediate Possession thereof 
(O. 21, R. 46) 
(Title) 
To 
222

 
               
 
 
 
  
 
 
        
 
          
   
     
      
 
            
 
       
 
        
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
 
       
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
         
 
                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has failed to satisfy a decree passed against . . . . . . . on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . 
. . . . . 19 . . . ., in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . . . of 19 . . . . ., in favour of . . . . . . . for Rs. . . . . . . . ; It is ordered that 
the defendant be, and is hereby, prohibited and restrained until the further order of this Court, from receiving 
from . . . . . . . the following property in the possession of the said, . . . . . . . that is to say, . . . . . ., to which the 
defendant is entitled, subject to any claim of the said . . . . . . ., and the said . . . . . . . is hereby prohibited and 
restrained, until the further order of this Court, from delivering the said property to any person or persons 
whomsoever. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Judge. 
[479][No. 16A 
Affidavit of Assets to be made by a Judgment-debtor 
Order XXI, Rule 41(2)] 
In the Court of 
A.B . . . . . . . . . Decree-holder. 
vs. 
C . . . . . . . . Judgment-debtor. 
I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . of 
state onEroman{{oath} over {solemn affirmation}} as follows:— 
1. My full name is . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , 
(Block Capitals) 
2. I live at 
*3. I am married/single/widower (widow)/divorced 
4. The following persons are dependant upon me:— 
5. My employment, trade or profession is that of carried on by me at 
I am a director of the following companies:— 
6. My present annual/monthly/weekly income, after paying income-tax, is as follows:— 
(a) From my employment, trade or profession Rs. 
(b) From other sources Rs. 
*7. (a) I own the house in which I live; its value is Rs. 
I pay as outgoings by way of rates, mortgage, interest, etc., the annual sum of Rs. 
(b) I pay as rent the annual sum of Rs. . . . . . . . 
8. I possess the following:— 
(a) Banking accounts; 
(b) Stocks and shares; 
(c) Life and endowment policies; Give particulars. 
(d) House property; 
(e) Other property; 
(f) Other securities; 
223

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
                             
 
 
       
                             
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
         
 
    
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
   
      
 
      
    
 
        
 
    
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
         
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. The following debts are due to me:—C0 
(give particulars) 
(a) Form . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rs. 
(b) From . . . . . . .of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Rs. . . . . . . .(etc.) 
Sworn before me, etc.] 
No. 17 
Attachment in Execution Prohibitory Order, where the Property Consists of 
Debts not Secured by Negotiable Instruments 
(O. 21, R. 46) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas. . . . . . .has failed to satisfy a decree passed against . . . . . . . . . on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . 
. 19. . ., in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . of 19 . . . . . . . , in favour of until the further order of this Court, from receiving 
from you a certain debt alleged now to be due from you to the said defendant, namely, . . . . . . . . . and that 
you, the said . . . . . . . . . be, and you are hereby, prohibited and restrained, until the further order of this 
Court, from making payment of the said debt, or any part thereof, to any person whomsoever or otherwise 
than into this Court. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of 19 . . . 
Judge. 
No. 18 
Attachment in Execution Prohibitory Order, where the Property Consists of 
Shares in the Capital of a Corporation 
(O. 21, R. 46) 
(Title) 
To 
Defendant and to . . . . . . . . . , Secretary of Corporation 
Whereas . . . had failed to satisfy a decree passed against . . . on the . . . day of. . . 19 . . . , in Suit No. . . . . . 
. . . . of 19 . . . . . , in favour of. . . , for Rs. . . . . ; It is ordered that you, the defendant, be, and you are hereby, 
prohibited and restrained, until the further order of the Court, from making any transfer of. . . . shares in the 
aforesaid corporation, namely, . . . . or from receiving payment of any dividends thereon; and you, . . . , the 
Secretary of the said Corporation, are hereby prohibited and restrained from permitting any such transfer or 
making any such payment. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . 19. . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 19 
Order to Attach Salary of Public Officer or Servant of Railway 
Company or Local Authority 
(O. 21, R. 48) 
224

 
 
 
           
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
           
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
      
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
          
    
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
(Title) 
To 
o
Whereas . . . . . . . . . , judgment-debtor in the above-named case, is a (describe officer of judgment-debtor) 
receiving his salary (or allowances) at your hands; and whereas . . . . . . . . . , decree-holder in the said case, 
has applied in this Court for the attachment of the salary (or allowances) of the said . . . . . . . . to the extent of 
. . . . . . . . due to him under the decree; You are hereby required to withhold the said sum of. . . . . . . . . . from 
the salary of the said . . . . . . . . . in monthly instalments of . . . . . . . . and to remit the said sum (or monthly 
instalments) to this Court. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . 19. . . 
Judge. 
No. 20 
Order of Attachment of Negotiable Instrument 
(O. 21, R. 51) 
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court. 
Whereas an order has been passed by this Court on the . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . ., for the attachment 
of . . . ; You are hereby directed to seize the said . . . . . . . . . and bring the same into Court. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... 
Judge. 
No. 21 
Attachment Prohibitory Order, where the Property Consists of Money or of 
any Security in the Custody of a Court of Justice of Public Officer 
(O. 21, R. 52). 
(Title) 
To 
Sir, 
The plaintiff having applied, under rule 52 of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, for an 
attachment of certain money now in your hands (here state how the money is supposed to be in the hands of 
the person addressed, on what account, etc.), I request that you will hold the said money subject to the 
further order of this Court. 
I have the hounour to be, 
Sir 
Your most obedient Servant. 
Judge. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19... 
No. 22 
Notice of Attachment of a Decree to the Court which Passed it 
(O. 21, R. 52.) 
225

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
 
          
   
           
 
          
 
     
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
          
         
     
 
 
          
 
 
        
 
      
          
          
          
            
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
  
 
       
 
     
 
          
 
         
 
 
 
 
        
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
      
 
(Title) 
To 
o
The Judge of the Court of 
Sir, 
I have the honour to inform you that the decree obtained in your Court on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 
19. . . by . . . . . . . . . in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . of 1`9. . . , in which he was . . . . . . . . . and . . . . . . . . . was . . . 
has been attached by this Court on the application of . . . . . . . . . , the . . . . . . . . . in the suit specified above. 
You are therefore requested to stay the execution of the decree of your Court until you receive an intimation 
from this Court that the present notice has been cancelled or until execution of the said decree is applied for 
by the holder of the decree now sought to be executed or by his judgment-debtor. 
I have the honour, etc. 
Judge. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of. . . 19. . . 
No. 23 
Notice of Attachment of a Decree to the Holder of the Decree 
(O. 21, R. 53) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas an application has been made in this Court by the decree-holder in the above suit for the 
attachment of a decree obtained by you on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . 19 . . ., in the Court of . . . . . . . . . 
in Suit No. . . . . . . . of 19 . . . , in which . . . . . . . . . was . . . . . . . . . and . . . . . . . . . was . . . . . . . . . It is 
ordered that you, the said . . . . . ., be, and you are hereby, prohibited and restrained, until the further order of 
this Court, from transferring or charging the same in any way. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Judge. 
No. 24 
Attachment in Execution 
Prohibitory Order, Where the Property Consists of Immovable Property 
(O. 21, R. 54) 
(Title) 
To 
Defendant 
Whereas you have failed to satisfy a decree passed against you on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
., in Suit No. . . . . . . of 19. . . , in favour of . . . . . . . . . .for Rs. . . . . . .; It is ordered that you, the said . . . . . . . 
. . , be, and you are hereby, prohibited and restrained, until the further order of the Court, from transferring or 
charging the property specified in the schedule hereunto annexed, by sale, gift or otherwise, and that all 
person be, and that they are hereby, prohibited from receivng the same by purchase, gift or otherwise. 
[480] [It is also ordered that you should attend Court on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . to take notice 
of the date fixed for setting the terms of the proclamation of sale.] 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . . . 
Schedule 
226

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
          
          
     
 
 
          
          
     
 
          
 
     
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
          
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
          
          
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
          
          
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
         
   
     
 
  
  
 
          
 
 
          
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
     
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
Judge. 
No. 25 
Order for Payment to the Plaintiff, etc., of Money, etc., in the Hands of a Third Party 
(O. 21, R. 56) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas the following property . . . . . . . . . has been attached in execution of a decree in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . 
of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . , passed on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . , in favour of . . . . . . . . . for Rs. . . . . 
. . . . . . It is ordered that the property so attached, consisting of Rs. . . . . . . . . . in money and Rs. . . . . . . . . . 
in currency-notes, or a sufficient part thereof to satisfy the said decree, shall be paid over by you, the said . . 
. . . . . . . to 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . day of . . . . 19 . . . 
Judge. 
No. 26 
Notice to Attaching Creditor 
(O. 21, R. 58) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has made application to this Court for the removal of attachment on . . . . . . . .placed at 
your instance in execution of the decree in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . , this is to give you notice 
to appear before this Court on . . . . . . . . . , the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . either in person or by a 
pleader of the Court duly instructed to support your claim, as attaching creditor. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Judge. 
No. 27 
Warrant of Sale of Property in Execution of a Decree for Money 
(O. 21, R. 66) 
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court. 
These are to command you to sell by auction, after giving . . . . . . . . . days' previous notice, by affixing the 
same in this Court-house, and after making due proclamation, the . . . . . . . . . . property attached under a 
warrant from this Court, dated the . . . . . . . . day of. . . 19. . . , in execution of a decree in favour of . . . . . . . . . 
in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . of 19 . . ., or so much of the said property as shall realize the sum of Rs. . . . . ., being 
the . . . . . of the said decree and costs still remaining unsatisifed. 
You are further commanded to retrun this warrant on or before the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . 19. . . , with an 
endorsement certifying the manner in which it has been executed, or the reason why it has not been 
executed. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
Judge. 
No. 28 
227

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
          
 
          
 
         
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
    
 
 
          
           
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notice of the Day Fixed for Setting a Sale Proclamation 
(O. 21, R. 66) 
(Title) 
To 
Judgment-debtor. 
Whereas in the above-named suit . . . . . . . . . , the decree-holder, has applied for the sale of . . . . . . . . . ; you 
are hereby informed . . . . . . . . . that the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . 19. . . . , has been affixed for setting the 
terms of the proclamation of sale. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
Judge. 
No. 29 
Proclamation of Sale 
(O. 21, R. 66) 
(Title) 
(1) Suit No. . . . . of 19. . . , decided by the . . . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . . . in which was plaintiff and was 
defendant—Notice is hereby given that, under rule 64 of Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, an 
order has been passed by this Court for the sale of the attached property mentioned in the annexed 
schedule, in satisfaction of the claim of the decree-holder in the suit (1) mentioned in the margin, amounting 
with costs and interest up to date of sale to the sum of. 
The sale will be by public auction, and the property will be put up for sale in the lots specified in the schedule. 
The sale will be of the property of the judgment-debtors above-named as mentioned in the schedule below; 
and the liabilities and claims attaching to the said property, so far as they have been ascertained, are those 
specified in the schedule against each lot. 
In the absence of any order of postponement, the sale will be held by . . . . . . . . . at the monthly sale 
commencing at . . . . . . . . . o'clock on the . . . . . . . . . at . . . . . . . . . In the event, however, of the debt above 
specified and of the costs of the sale being tendered or paid before the knocking down of any lot, the sale will 
be stopped. 
At the sale the public generally are invited to bid, either personally or by duly authorized agent. No bid by, or 
on behalf of, the judgment-creditors above-mentioned, however, will be accepted, nor will any sale to them 
be valid without the express permission of the Court previously given. The following are the further. 
Conditions of sale 
1. The particulars specified in the schedule below have been stated to the best of the information of the 
Court, but the Court will not be answerable for any error, mis-statement or omission in this proclamation. 
2. The amount by which the biddings are to be increased shall be determined by the officer conducting the 
sale. In the event of any dispute arising as to the amount bid, or as to the bidder, the lot shall at once be 
again put up to auction. 
3. The highest bidder shall be declared to be the purchaser of any lot, provided always that he is legally 
qualified to bid, and provided that it shall be in the discretion of the Court or officer holding the sale to decline 
acceptance of the highest bid when the price offered appears so clearly inadequate as to make it advisable 
to do so. 
4. For reasons recorded, it shall be in the discretion of the officer conducting the sale to adjourn it subject 
always to the provisions of rule 69 of Order XXI. 
5. In the case of movable property, the price of each lot shall be paid at the time of sale or as soon after as 
the officer holding the sale directs, and in default of payment the property shall forthwith be again put up and 
re-sold. 
228

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
       
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
         
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. In the case of immovable property, the person declared to be the purchaser shall pay immediately after 
such declaration a deposit of 25 per cent. on the amount of his purchaser-money to the officer conducting 
the sale, and in default of such deposit the property and forthwith be put up again and re-sold. 
7. The full amount of the purchase-money shall be paid by the purchaser before the Court closes on the 
fifteenth day after the sale of the property, exclusive of such day, or if the fifteenth day be a Sunday or other 
holiday, then on the first office day after the fifteenth day. 
8. In default of payment of the balance of purchase-money within the period allowed, the property shall be re­
sold after the issue of a fresh notification of sale. The deposit, after defraying the expenses of the sale, may, 
if the Court thinks fit, be forfeited to Government and the defaulting purchaser shall forfeit all claim to the 
property or to any part of the sum for which it may be subsequently sold. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
Judge. 
Schedule of Property 
Number of lot 
Description of property to be sold, with the name of each owner where there are more judgment-debtors than 
one 
The revenue assessed upon the estate or part of the estate, if the property to be sold is an interest in estate 
or a part of an estate paying revenue to Government 
Detail of any encumbrances to which the property is liable 
Claims, if any, which have been put forward to the property and any other known particular bearing on its 
nature and value 
[481][The value of the property as state by the decree holder 
The value of the property as stated by the judgment-debtor] 
No. 30 
Order on the Nazir for Causing Service of Proclamation of Sale 
(O. 21, R. 66) 
(Title) 
To 
The Nazir of the Court. 
Whereas an order has been made for the sale of the property of the judgment-debtor specified in the 
schedule hereunder annexed, and whereas the . . . . . . . day of . .. . . . . 19. . ., has been fixed for the sale of 
the said property, . . . . copies of the proclamation of sale are by this warrant made over to you, and you are 
hereby ordered to have the proclamation published by beat of drum within each of the properties specified in 
the said schedule, to affix a copy of the said proclamation on a conspicuous part of each of the said 
properties and afterwards on the Court-house, and then to submit to this Court a report showing the dates on 
which and the manner in which the proclamations have been published. 
Date the . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Schedule 
Judge. 
No. 31 
Certificate by Officer Holding a Sale of the Deficiency of Price on a 
Re-sale of Property by Reason of the Purchaser's Default 
229

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
  
 
 
           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
    
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
          
 
             
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
                
 
                          
 
          
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
          
  
 
 
 
         
    
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(O. 21, R. 71) 
(Title) 
Certified that at the re-sale of the property in execution of the decree in the above-named suit, in 
consequence of default on the part of. . . . . . . . . . . . ., purchase, there was a deficiency in the price of the 
said property amounting to Rs...., and that the expenses attending such re-sale amounted to Rs. . . . . . . . . . , 
making a total of Rs. . . . . . . . . . , which sum is recoverable from the defaulter. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Officer holding the sale 
No. 32 
Notice to Person in Possession of Movable Property Sold in Execution 
(O. 21, R. 79) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree in the above suit 
of . . . . . . . . . now in your possession, you are hereby prohibited from delivering possession of the said . . . . . 
. . . . to any person except the said . . . . . . . . . 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . ., 
Judge. 
No. 33 
Prohibitory Order against Payment of Debts Sold in Execution to any 
Other than the Purchaser 
(O. 21, R. 79) 
(Title) 
To 
and to . . . . . . . . . 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree in the above suit 
of . . . . . . . . . being debts due from you . . . . . . . . . to you . . . . . . . . . ; It is ordered that you . . . . . . . . . be, 
and you are hereby, prohibited from receiving, and you . . . . . . . . . from making payment of, the said debt to 
any person of or person except the said . . . . . . . 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
Judge. 
No. 34 
Prohibitory Order against the Transfer of Share Sold in Execution 
(O. 21, R. 79) 
(Title) 
To 
. . . . . . . . . and . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . , Secretary of . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . Corporation. 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has become the purchaser at a public sale in execution of the decree, in the above suit, 
of certain shares in the above Corporation, that is to say, of . . . . . . . . . standing in the name of you . . . . . . . . 
. ; It is ordered that you . . . . . . . . . be, and you are hereby, prohibited from making any transfer of the said 
230

 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
   
       
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
          
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
shares to any person except the said . . . . . . . . . , the purchaser aforesaid, or from receiving any dividends 
thereon; and you . . . . . . . . . , Secretary of the said Corporation, from permitting any such transfer or making 
any such payment to any person except the said . . . . . . . . . , the purchaser aforesaid. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . , 
Judge. 
No. 35 
Certificate to Judgment-debtor Authorising him to Mortgage Lease or Sell Property 
(O. 21, R. 83) 
(Title) 
Whereas in execution of the decree passed in the above suit an order was made on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . 
. . . . . . . 19. . . , for the sale of the under-mentioned property of the judgment-debtor . . . . . . . . . , and 
whereas the Court has, on the application of the said judgment-debtor, postponed the said sale to enable 
him to raise the amount of the decree by mortgage, lease or private sale of the said property or of some part 
thereof: 
This is to certify that the Court doth hereby authorize the said judgment-debtor to make the proposed 
mortgage, lease or sale within a period of . . . . . . . . . from the date of this certificate; provided that all monies 
payable under such mortgage, lease or sale be paid into this Court and not to the said judgment-debtor. 
Description of property 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
Judge. 
No. 36 
Notice to Show Cause Why Sale should not be Set Aside 
(O. 21, R. 90, 92) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas the under-mentioned property was sold on the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . ., in execution of the 
decree passed in the abovenamed suit, and whereas . . . . . . . . . , the decree-holder [or judgement-debtor], 
has applied to this Court to set aside the sale of the said property on the ground of a material irregularity [or 
fraud] in publishing [or conducting] the sale, namely, that . . . . . . . . . 
Take notice that if you have any cause to show why the said application should not be granted, you should 
appear with your proofs in this Court on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . ., when the said application 
will be heard and determined. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
Description of property 
Judge. 
No. 37 
Notice to Show Cause Why Sale should not be Set Aside 
(O. 21, R. 91, 92) 
(Title) 
To 
231

 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
          
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
          
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
         
 
          
    
      
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
        
        
  
  
 
 
  
 
          
          
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
      
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
              
         
     
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
Whereas . . . . . . . . . , the purchaser of the under-mentioned property sold on . . . . . . . . the day of . . . . . . . . . 
19 . . ., in execution of the decree passed in the above-named suit, has applied to this Court to set aside the 
sale of the said property on the ground that . . . . . . . . . , the judgment-debtor, had no saleable interest 
therein. 
Take notice that if you have any cause, to show why the said application should not be granted, you should 
appear with your proofs in this Court on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., when the said application 
will be heard and determiend. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
Description of property 
Judge. 
No. 38 
Certificate of Sale of Land 
(O. 21, R. 94) 
(Title) 
This is to certify that . . . . . . . . . has been declared the purchaser at a sale by public auction on the . . . . . . . . 
. day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . ., of . . . . in execution of decree in this suit, and that the said sale has been duly 
confirmed by this Court. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
Judge. 
No. 39 
Order for Delivery to Certified Purchaser of Land at a Sale in Execution 
(O. 21, R. 95) 
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court, 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has become the certified purchaser . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . at a sale in 
execution of decree in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . ; You are hereby ordered to put the said . . . . 
. . . . . , the certified purchaser, as aforesaid, in possession of the same. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Judge. 
No. 40 
Summons to Appear and Answer Charge of Obstructing Execution of Decree 
(O. 21, R. 97) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . the decree-holder in the above suit, has complained to this Court that you 
have resisted (or obstructed) the officer charged with the execution of the warrant for possession: 
You are hereby summoned to appear in this Court on the . . . . . .. . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . 19. . . . ., at . . . . 
a.m., to answer the said complaint. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
232

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
                   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge. 
No. 41 
Warrant of Committal 
(O. 21, R. 98) 
(Title) 
To 
The officer in charge of the Jail at. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Whereas the under-mentioned property has been decreed to . . . . . . . . . , the plaintiff in this suit, and 
whereas the Court is satisfied that . . . . . . . . . without any just cause resisted [or obstructed] and is still 
resisting [or obstructing] the said . . . . . . . . . in obtaining possession of the property, and whereas the said . . 
. . . . . . . . . . has made application to this Court that he said . . . . . . . . . be committed to the civil prison; 
You are hereby commanded and required to take and receive the said . . . . . . . . . into the civil prison and to 
keep him imprisoned therein for the period of . . . . . . . . . days. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
Judge. 
No. 42 
Authority of the Collector to Stay Public Sale of Land 
(Section 72) 
(Title) 
To 
Collector of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sir, 
In answer to your communication No. . . . . . . . . . dated . . . . . . . . . representing that the sale in execution of 
the decree in this suit of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . land situate within your district is objectionable, I have the 
honour to inform you that you are authorised to make provision for the satisfaction of the said deree in the 
manner recommended by you. 
I have the honour to be, 
Sir, 
Your obedient servant 
Judge. 
APPENDIX F 
SUPPLEMENTAL PROCEEDINGS 
No. 1 
Warrant of Arrest before Judgment 
(O. 38, R. 1) 
(Title) 
To 
o
The Bailiff of the Court. 
233

 
           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
  
        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
          
     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
          
          
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
          
 
          
    
   
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
Whereas . . . . . . . . . , the plaintiff in the above suit, claims the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . as noted in the margin, 
and has proved to the satisfaction of the Court that there is probable cause for believing that the defendant is 
about to . . . . . . These are to command you to demand and receive from the said . . . . . . . . . the sum of Rs. . 
. . . . . . . . as sufficint to satisfy the plaintiff's claim, and unless the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . is forthwith 
delivered to you by or on behalf of the said . . . . . . . . . to take the said . . . . . . . . . into custody, and to bring 
him before this Court in order that he may show cause why he should not furnish security to the amount of 
Rs . . . . . . . . . for his personal appearance before the Court, until such time as the said suit shall be fully and 
finally disposed of, and until satisfaction of any decree that may be passed against him in the suit. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Judge. 
Principal 
Interest 
Costs 
Total 
No. 2 
Security for Appearance of a Defendant Arrested before Judgment 
(O. 38, R. 2) 
(Title) 
Whereas at the instance of . . . . . . . . . , the plaintiff in the above suit, the defendant, has been arrested and 
brought before the Court; 
And whereas on the failure of the said defendant to show cause why he should not furnish security for his 
appearance, the Court has ordered him to furnish such security: 
Therefore I . . . . . . . . . . . . have voluntarily become surety and do hereby bind myself, my heirs and 
executors, to the said Court, that the said defendant shall appear at any time when called upon while the suit 
is pending and until satisfaction of any decree that may be passed against him in the said suit; and in default 
of such appearance I bind myself, my heirs and executors, to pay to the said Court, at its order, any sum of 
money that may be adjudged against the said defendant in the said suit. 
Witness my hand at . . . . . . . . . this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
(Signed) 
Witnesses. 
1. 
2. 
No. 3 
Summons to Defendant to Appear on Surety's Application For Discharge 
(O. 38, R. 3) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . , who became surety on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . for your appearance in 
the above suit, has applied to this Court to be discharged from this obligation: 
You are hereby summoned to appear in this Court in person on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . , at . . 
. . . . . . . a.m., where the said application will be heard and determined. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
234

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
         
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
              
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
  
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Judge. 
No. 4 
Order For Committal 
(O. 38, R. 4) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . , plaintiff in this suit, has made application to the Court that security be taken for the 
appearance of . . . . . . . . . , the defendant, to answer any judgment that may be passed against him in the 
suit; and whereas the Court has called upon the defendant to furnish such security, or to offer a sufficient 
deposit in lieu of security, which he had failed to do; it is ordered that the said defendant . . . . . . . . . be 
committed to the civil prison until the decision of the suit; or, if judgment be pronounced against him, until 
satisfaction of the decree. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
Judge 
No. 5 
Attachment before Judgment, with Order to Call for Security for 
Fulfilment of Decree 
(O. 38, R. 5) 
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court. 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has proved to the satisfaction of the Court that the defendant in the above suit . . . . . . . . 
. ; . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
These are to command you to call upon the said defendant . . . . . . . . . on or before the . . . . . . . . . . . . . day 
of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . . . . . . either to furnish security for the sum of rupees . . . . . . . . . to produce and place 
at the disposal of this Court when required . . . . . . . . . for the value thereof, or such portion of the value as 
may be sufficient to satisfy any decree that may be passed against him; or to appear and show cause why 
he should not furnish security; and you are further ordered to attach the said . . . . . . . . . and keep the same 
under safe and secure custody until the further order of the Court; and you are further commanded to retun 
this warrant on or before the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . , with an endorsement certifying the date on 
which and the manner in which it has been executed, or the reason why it has not been executed. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Judge. 
No. 6 
Security for the Production of Property 
(O. 38, R. 5) 
(Title) 
Whereas at the instance of . . . . . . . . . , the plaintiff in the above suit, . . . . . . . . . . the defendant has been 
directed by the Court to furnish security in the sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . to produce and place at the disposal of 
the Court the property specified in the schedule hereunto annexed; 
Therefore I . . . . . . . . . have voluntarily become surety and do hereby bind myself, my heirs and executors, 
to the said Court, that the said defendant shall produce and place at the disposal of the court, when required, 
the property specified in the said schedule, or the value of the same, or such portion thereof as may be 
235

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
      
      
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
sufficient to satisfy the decree; and in default of his so doing I bind myself, my heirs and executors, to pay to 
the said Court, at its order; the said sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . of such sum not exceeding the said sum as the 
said Court may adjudge. 
Schedule 
Witness my hand at . . . . . . . . . this day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
(Signed) 
Witnesses. 
1. 
2. 
No. 7 
Attachment before Judgment, on Proof of Failure to Furnish Security 
(O. 38, R. 6) 
(Title) 
To 
The Bailiff of the Court. 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . , the plaintiff in this suit, has applied to the Court to call upon . . . . . . . . . the defendant, 
to furnish security to fulfil any decree that may be passed against him in the suit, and whereas the Court has 
called upon the said . . . . . . . . . to furnish such security, which he has failed to do; these are to command 
you to attach . . . . . . . . . , the property of the said . . . . . . . . . , and keep the same under safe and secure 
custody until the further order of the Court, and you are further commanded to return this warrant on or 
before the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . . . . . . with an endorsement certifying the date on which and 
the manner in which it has been executed, or the reason why it has not been executed. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
Judge. 
No. 8 
Temporary Injunctions 
(O. 39, R. 1) 
(Title) 
Upon motion made unto this Court by . . . . . . . . . Pleader of [or Counsel for] the plaintiffA. B., and upon 
reading the petition of the said plaintiff in this matter filed [this day] [or the plaint filed in this suit on the . . . . . 
. . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . ,or the written statement of the said plaintiff filed on the . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 
] and upon hearing the evidence of . . . . . . . . . and . . . . . . . . . in support thereof [if after notice and 
defendant not appearing: and, and also, the evidence of . . . . . . . . . as to service of notice of this motion 
upon the defendantC.D.]: This Court doth order that an injunction be awarded to restrain the defendantC.D., 
his servants, agents and workmen, from pulling down, or suffering to be pulled down, the house in the plaint 
in the said suit of the plaintiff mentioned [or in the written statement,or petition, of the plaintiff and evidence at 
the hearing of this motion mentioned], being No. 9, Oilmongers Street, Hindupur, in a Taluk of . . . . . . . . . 
and from selling the materials where of the said house is composed, until the hearing of this suit of until the 
further order of this Court. 
Dated this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . . 
Judge. 
[Where the injunction is sought to restrain the negotiation of a note or bill, the ordering part of the order may 
run thus:—] 
236

 
         
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
         
 
 
 
 
  
          
 
  
  
          
 
  
        
 
 
           
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
    
 
. . . . . . . . . to restrain the defendant . . . . . . . . . and . . . . . . . . . from parting without of the custody of them or 
any of them or endorsing, assigning or negotiating the promisory note [or bill of exchange] in question, dated 
on or about the . . . . . . . . . , etc., mentioned in the plaintiff's plaint [or petition] and the evidence heard at this 
motion until the hearing of this suit, or until the further order of this Court. 
[In Copyright cases] to restrain the defendantC.D., his servants, agents or workmen, from printing, publishing 
or vending a book, called . . . . . . . . . or any part thereof, until the, etc. 
[Where part only of a book is to be restrained] 
. . . . . . . . . to restrain the defendantC.D., his servant, agents or workmen, from printing, publishing, selling or 
otherwise disposing of such parts of the book in the plaint [or petition and evidence, etc.] mentioned to have 
been published by the defendant as hereinafter specified, namely, that part of the said book which is entitled 
. . . . . . . . . and also that part which is entitled . . . . . . . . . [or which is contained in page . . . . . . . . . to page . 
. . . . . . . . both inclusive] until . . . . . . . . . , etc. 
[In Patent cases] . . . . . . . . . to restrain the defendantC. D., his agents, servants and workmen, from making 
or vending any perforated bricks [or as the case may be] upon the principle of the inventions in the plaintiff's 
plaint [or petition, etc.,or written statement, etc.,] mentioned, belonging to the plaintiffs, or either of them, 
during the remainder of the respective terms of the patents in the plaintiff's plaint [or as the case may be] 
mentioned, and from counterfeiting, imitating or resembling the same inventions or either of them, or making 
any addition thereto, or substraction therefrom, until the hearing, etc. 
[In cases of Trade marks] . . . . . . . . . to restrain the defendantC.D., his servants, agents or workmen, from 
selling, or exposing for sale, or procuring to be sold, any composition or blacking [or as the case may be] 
described as or purporting to be blacking manufactured by the plaintiffA.B., in bottles having affixed thereto 
such labels as in the plaintiff's plaint [or petition, etc.] mentioned, or any other labels so contrived or 
expressed as, by colourable imitation or otherwise, to represent the composition or blacking sold by the 
defendant to be the same as the composition or blacking manufactured and sold by the plaintiffA.B., and 
from using trade-cards so contrived or expressed as to represent that any composition or blacking sold or 
proposed to be sold by the defendant is the same as the composition or blacking manufactured or sold by 
the plaintiffA.B., until the, etc. 
[To restrain a partner from in any way interfering in the business] 
to restrain the defendantC.D., his agents, and servants, from entering into any contract, and from accepting, 
drawing, endorsing or negotiating any bill of exchange, note or written security in the name of the partnership 
firm ofB. andD., and from contracting any debt, buying and selling any goods, and from making or entering 
into any verbal or written promise, agreement or undertaking, and from doing, or causing to be done, any act, 
in the name or the credit of the said partnership-firm ofB. andD., or whereby the said partnership-firm can or 
may in any manner become or be made liable to or for the payment of any sum of money, or for the 
performance of any contract, promise or undertaking until the, etc. 
No. 9 
Appointment of a Receiver 
(O. 40, R. 1) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . has been attached in execution of a decree passed in the above suit on the . . . . . . . . . 
day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . ., in favour of . . . . . . . . . ; You are hereby (subject to your giving security to the 
satisfaction of the Court) appointed receiver of the said property under Order XL of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, with full powers under the provisions of that Order. 
You are required to render a due and proper account of your receipts and disbursements in respect of the 
said property on . . . . . . . . . You will be entitled to remuneration at the rate of . . . . . . . . . per cent. upon your 
receipts under the authority of this appointment. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Judge 
237

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
           
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
           
          
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
         
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
 
               
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
          
 
          
 
 
 
           
 
          
          
        
 
          
          
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
           
 
  
 
          
 
    
 
           
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
      
 
 
 
 
No. 10 
Bond to be Given by Receiver 
(O. 40, R. 3) 
(Title) 
Know all men by these presents, that we, . . . . . . . . . and . . . . . . . . . and . . . . . . . . . , are jointly and 
severally bound to . . . . . . . . . of the Court of . . . . . . . . . in Rs. . . . . . . . . . to be paid to be said . . . . . . . . . or 
his successor in office for the time being. For which payment to be made we bind ourselves, and each of us, 
in the whole, our and each of our heirs, executors and administrators, jointly and severally, by these 
presents. 
Dated this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19.. . 
Whereas a plaint has been filed in this Court by . . . . . . . . . against . . . . . . . . . for the purpose of [here insert 
the object of suit]: 
And whereas the said . . . . . . . . . has been appointed, by order of the above-mentioned Court, to receive the 
rents and profits of the immovable property and to get in the outstanding movable property of . . . . . . . . . . . . 
. .in the said plaint named: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Now the condition of this obligation is such, that if the above-bounden . . . . . . . . . shall duly account for all 
and every the sum and sums of money which he shall so receive on account of the rents and profits of the 
immovable property, and in respect of the movable property, of the said . . . . . . . . . at such periods as the 
said Court shall appoint, and shall duly pay the balances which shall from time to time be certified to be due 
from him as the said Court hath directed or shall hereafter direct, then this obligation shall be void otherwise 
it shall remain in full force. 
Signed and delivered by the above-bounden in the presence of . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Note.—If deposit of money is made, the memorandum thereof should follow the terms and the condition of 
the bond. 
APPENDIX G 
APPEAL, REFERENCE AND REVIEW 
No. 1 
Memornadum of Appeal 
(O. 4l, R. 1) 
(Title) 
The 
. . . . . . . above-named appeals to the . . . . . . . . . Court at . . . . . . . . . from the decree of . . . . . . . . . in Suit 
No. . . . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . . . , dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . , and sets forth the 
following grounds of objection to the decree appealed from, namely:— 
No. 2 
Security Bond to be Given on Order Being Made to Stay Execution of Decree 
(O. 41, R. 5) 
(Title) 
To 
o
This security bond on stay of execution of decree executed by . . . . . . . . . witnesseth:— 
That . . . . . . . . . , the plaintiff in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . of 19 . . . having sued . . . . . . . . . , the defendant, in this 
Court and a decree having been passed on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . , in favour of the plaintiff, 
238

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
         
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
  
 
       
    
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
          
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the defendant having preferred an appeal from the said decree in the . . . . . . . . . Court, the said appeal 
is still pending. 
Now the plaintiff decree-holder having applied to execute the decree, the defendant has made an application 
praying for stay of execution and has been called upon to furnish security. Accordingly I, of my own free will, 
stand security to the extent of Rs. . . . . . . . . ., mortgaging the properties specified in the schedule hereunto 
annexed, and covenant that if the decree of the first Court be confirmed or varied by the Appellate Court the 
said defendant shall duly act in accordance with the decree of the Appellate Court and shall pay whatever 
may be payable by him thereunder, and if he should fail theein then any amount so payable shall be realized 
from the properties hereby mortgaged, and if the proceeds of the sale of the said properties are insufficient to 
pay the amount due, I and my legal representatives will be personally liable to pay the balance. To this effect 
I execute this security bond this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . 19. . . 
Schedule 
(Signed) 
Witnessed by 
1. 
2. 
No. 3 
Security Bond to be Given During the Pendency of Appeal 
(O. 41, R. 6) 
(Title) 
To 
This security bond on stay of execution of decree executed by witnesseseth:— 
That . . . . . . . . . , the plaintiff in Suit No. . . . . . . of . . . 19 . . . , having sued, the defendant, in this Court and 
a decree having been passed on the . . . day of . . . 19 . . ., in favour of the plaintiff, and the defendant having 
preferred an appeal from the said decree in the Court, the said appeal is still pending. 
Now the plaintiff decree-holder has applied for execution of the said decree and has been called upon to 
furnish security. Accordingly I, of my own free will, stand security to the extent of Rs. . . . , mortgaging the 
properties specified in the schedule hereunto annexed, and covenant that if the decree of the first Court be 
reversed or varied by the Appellate Court, the plaintiff shall restore any property which may be or has been 
taken in execution of the said decree and shall duly act in accordance with the decree of the Appellate Court 
and shall pay whatever may be payable by him thereunder, and if he should fail therein then any amount so 
payable shall be realized from the properties hereby mortgaged, and if the proceeds of the sale of the said 
properties are insufficient to pay the amount due, I and my legal representatives will be personally liable to 
pay the balance. To this effect I execute this security bond this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Schedule 
(Signed) 
Witnessed by 
1. 
2. 
No. 4 
Security for Costs of Appeal 
(O. 4l, R. 10) 
(Title) 
239

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
          
    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
          
        
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
          
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
          
 
          
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
          
          
          
        
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
  
 
 
 
 
          
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
        
     
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
To 
o
This security bond for costs of appeal executed by . . . . . . . witnesseth:— 
This appellant has preferred an appeal from the decree in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . of . . . 19 . . ., against the 
respondent, and has been called upon to furnish security. Accordingly I, of my own free will stand security for 
the costs of the appeal, mortgaging the properties specified in the Schedule hereunto annexed. I shall not 
transfer the said properties or any part thereof, and in the event of any default on the part of the appellant. I 
shall duly carry out any order that may be made against me with regard to payment of the costs of appeal. 
Any amount so payable shall be realized from the properties hereby mortgaged, and if the proceeds of the 
sale of the said properties are insufficient to pay the amount due I and my legal representatives will be 
personally liable to pay the balance. To this effect I execute this security bond this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 
. . 19 . . . 
Schedule 
(Signed) 
Witnessed by 
1. 
2. 
No. 5 
Intimation to Lower Court of Admission of Appeal 
(O. 4l, R. 13) 
(Title) 
To 
You are hereby directed to take notice that . . . . . . . . . , the . . . . . . . . . in the above suit, has preferred an 
appeal to this Court from the decree passed by you therein on the . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
You are requred to send with all practicable despatch all material papers in suit. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
Judge. 
No. 6 
Notice to Respondent of the Day Fixed for the Hearing of the Appeal 
(O. 4l, R. 14) 
(Title) 
Appeal from the . . . . . . . . . of the Court . . . . . . . . . of . . . . . . . . . the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
To Respondent 
Take notice that an appeal from the decree of . . . . . . . . . in this case has been presented by . . . . . . . . . and 
registered in this Court, and that the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . . . . . . has been fixed by this Court 
for the hearing of this appeal. 
If no appearance is made on your behalf by yourself, your pleader, or by some one by law authorized to act 
for you in this appeal, it will be heard and decided in your absence. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this. . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . .19 . . . 
Judge. 
[Note—If a stay of execution has been ordered, intimation should be given of the fact on this notice.] 
No. 7 
240

 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
         
      
 
 
           
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
          
     
    
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
        
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
          
 
 
 
          
 
    
 
     
 
           
        
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
           
          
     
    
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
 
         
    
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
         
 
          
 
 
 
           
 
 
 
 
          
      
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
     
     
           
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                      
 
 
 
          
 
         
     
 
 
 
 
Notice to a Party to a Suit not made a Party to the Appeal but 
Joined by the Court as a Respondent 
(O. 41, R. 20) 
(Title) 
To 
o
Whereas you were a party in Suit No. . . . . . . . . of . . . ., in the Court of, . . . . . . . . . , and whereas the . . . . . . 
has perferred an appeal to this Court from the decree passed against him in the said suit and it appears to 
o
this Court that you are interested in the result of the said appeal: 
This is to give you notice that this Court has directed you to be made a respondent in the said appeal and 
has adjourned the hearing thereof till the . . . . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . , at . . . a.m. If no 
appearance is made on your behalf on the said day and at the said hour the appeal will be heard and 
decided in your absence. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this. . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . .19 . . . 
Judge. 
No. 8 
Memorandum of Cross Objection 
(O. 41, R. 22) 
(Title) 
Whereas the . . . . . . has preferred an appeal to the . . . . Court at . . . . . . . . . from the decree of . . . . . . . . in 
Suit No. . . . of 19 . . . , dated the . . . . . . . . . . .day of . . . . . . . .19 . . , and whereas notice of the day fixed for 
hearing the appeal was served on the . . . . . . . . . . . . on the . . . . . . . . . . .day of . . . . . .. . . . .19 . . . , the . . . 
. . . . . . files this memorandum of cross objection under rule 22 of Order XLI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, and sets forth the following grounds of objection to the decree appealed from, namely:— 
No. 9 
Decree in Appeal 
(O. 41, R. 35) 
(Title) 
Appeal No. . . . . . . . . . of 19 . . . from the decree of the Court of . . . . . . . . dated the . . . . . . . . day of . . . 19 . 
. . 
Memorandum of Appeal. 
Plaintiff. 
Defendant. 
The . . . . . . . . . above-named appeal to the . . . . . . . . Court at . . . . . . . . . from the decree of . . . . . . . . . in 
the above suit, dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . 19 . . . , for the following reasons, namely:— 
This appeal coming on for hearing on the . . . . . . . . . day of. . . . . 19 . . . , before . . . . . . . . . in the presence 
of . . . . . . . . . or the appellant and of . . . . . . . . . for the respondent, it is ordered— 
The costs of this appeal, as detailed below, amounting to Rs. . . are to be paid by . . . . . . . . . The costs of the 
original suit are to be paid by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Given under my hand this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
Judge 
Costs of Appeal 
241

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
          
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Appellant 
Amount 
Respondent 
Amount 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Stamp for memorandum of appeal 
Do. For power 
Service of processes 
Pleader's fee on Rs. 
Total 
Rs. 
a. 
p. 
Stamp for power 
Do. For power 
Service of processes 
Pleader's fee on Rs. 
Total 
Rs. 
a. 
p. 
No. 10 
Application to Appeal in BIforma pauperis 
(O. 44, R. 1) 
(Title) 
I . . . . . . . . . the . . . . . . . . . above-named, present the accompanying memorandum of appeal from the 
decree in the above suit and apply to be allowed to appeal as a pauper. 
Annexed is a full and true schedule of all the movable and immovable property belonging to me with the 
estimated value thereof. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . 
(Signed) 
[Note.—Where the application is by the plaintiff he should state whether he applied and was allowed to sue 
in the Court of first instance as a pauper.] 
No. 11 
242

 
243
Notice of Appeal In BIforma pauperis 
(O. 44, R. 1) 
(Title) 
Whereas the above-named . . . . . . . . . has applied to be allowed to appeal as a pauper from the decree in 
the above suit dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . and whereas the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 
19 . . ., has been fixed for hearing the application, notice is hereby given to you that if you desire to show 
cause why the applicant should not be allowed to appeal as a pauper an opportunity will be given to you of 
doing so on the afore-mentioned date. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . 19 . . .  
Judge. 
No. 12 
Notice to Show Cause why a Certificate of Appeal to the 
Supreme Court should not be Granted 
(O. 43, R. 3.) 
(Title) 
To 
[482] [Take notice that . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has applied to this Court for a certificate— 
(i) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general importance, and 
(ii) that in the opinion of this Court the said question needs to be decided by the Supreme Court.] 
The . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . is fixed for you to show cause why the Court should not grant the 
certificate asked for. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Registrar. 
No. 13 
Notice to Respondent of Admission of Appeal to the Supreme Court 
(O. 45, R. 8.) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in the above case, has furnished the security and 
made the deposit required by Order XLV, rule 7, of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; 
Take notice that the appeal of the said . . . . . . . . . . . . . to the Supreme Court has been admitted on the . . . . 
. . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Registrar. 
No. 14 
Notice to Show Cause Why a Review should not be Granted 
(O. 47, R. 4.) 
(Title) 
To 

 
244
Take notice that . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has applied to this Court for a review of its decree passed on the . . . . . . . . 
. day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . fixed for you to show cause why the Court should not grant a review of its decree in 
this case. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
APPENDIX H 
MISCELLANEOUS 
No. 1 
Agreement of Parties as to Issues to be Tried 
(Order 14, Rule 6) 
(Title) 
Whereas we, the parties in the above suit, are agreed as to the question of fact [or of law] to be decided 
between us and the point at issue between us is whether a claim founded on a bond, dated the . . . . . . . . . 
day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . and filed as Exhibit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in the said suit, is or is not beyond the statute of 
limitation (or state the point at issue whatever it may be): 
We therefore severally bind ourselves that, upon the finding of the Court in the negative [or affirmative] of 
such issue, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . will pay to the said . . . . . . . the sum of Rupees . . . . . . . . . . (or such sum as 
the Court shall hold to be due thereon), and I, the said . . . . . . . . ., will accept the said sum of Rupees . . . . . . 
. . . (or such sum as the Court shall hold to be due) in full satisfaction of my claim on the bond aforesaid [or 
that upon such finding I, the said . . . . . . . , will do or abstain from doing, etc., etc.] 
Plaintiff. 
Defendant. 
Witnesses :— 
1. 
2. 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
No. 2 
Notice of Application for the Transfer of a Suit to Another Court for Trial 
(Section 24) 
In the Court of the District Judge of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . No. . . . . . . . of 19. . . ., 
To 
Whereas an application, dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . ., has been made to this Court by . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . the. . . . . . . . . . . . . . in Suit No. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . of 19. . . . . . . now pending in the Court of the . . . 
. . . . . . . . . . . at. . . . . . . , in which . . . . . . . is . . . . plaintiff and . . . . . . . . . . . . . . is defendant, for the transfer 
of the suit for trial to the Court of the . . . . . . . at . . . . . . .  
You are hereby informed that the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . ., has been fixed for the hearing of the 
application, when you will be heard if you desire to offer any objection to it. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . . . . . .day of . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Judge. 
[483][No. 2A 

 
245
List of Witnesses Proposed to be Called by Plaintiff/Defendant 
(Order XVI rule 1.) 
Name of the party which proposes to call the witness 
Name and address of the witness 
Remarks] 
No. 3 
Notice of Payment into Court 
(Order 24, Rule 2) 
(Title) 
Take notice that the defendant has paid into Court Rs.. . . . . . .  
and says that that sum is sufficient to satisfy the plaintiff's claim in full. 
X.Y., Pleader for the defendant. 
ToZ., Pleader for the plaintiff. 
No. 4 
Notice to Show Cause (General Form) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas the above-named . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has made application to this Court that . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ;. . . . . 
. .  
You are hereby warned to appear in this Court in person or by a pleader duly instructed on the . . . . . . . . . 
day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., at . . . . . . .O'clock in the forenoon, to show cause against the application, failing 
wherein, the said application will be heard and determinedex parte. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 5 
List of Documents Produced by Plaintiff/Defendant 
(Order 13, Rule 1) 
(Title) 
No. 
Description of document 
Date, if any which the document bears 
Signature of party or pleader 
1 
2 
3 
4 
No. 6 

 
246
Notice to Parties of the Day Fixed for Examination of a Witness 
about to Leave the Jurisdiction 
(Order 18, Rule 16.) 
(Title) 
To 
Plaintiff (or defendant) 
Whereas in the above suit application has been made to the Court by . . . . . . . . . . . . . . that the examination 
of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , a witness required by the said . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , in the said suit may be taken 
immediately; and it has been shown to the Court's satisfaction that the said witness is about to leave the 
Court's jurisdiction (or any other good and sufficient cause to be stated): 
Take notice that the examination of the said witness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . will be taken by the Court on the . . . . . 
. . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 7 
Commission to Examine Absent Witness 
(O. 26, Rules 4, 18) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas the evidence of . . . . . . . is required by the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in the above suit; and whereas . . . . . . 
. . . . . . . . ; you are requested to take the evidence on interrogatories [or viva voce] of such witness . . . . . . . . 
. . . . . . and you are hereby appointed Commissioner for that purpose. The evidence will be taken in the 
presence of the parties of their agents if in attendance, who will be at liberty to question the witness on the 
points specified, and you are further requested to make return of such evidence as soon as it may be taken. 
Process to compel the attendance of the witness will be issued by any Court having jurisdiction on your 
application. 
A sum of Rs. . . . . . . . , being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 8 
Letter of Request 
(O. 26, R. 5) 
(Title) 
(Heading :—To the President and Judges of, etc., etc.,or as the case may be.) 
Whereas a suit is now pending in the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . in whichA. B. is plaintiff andC. D. is defendant; And in 
the said suit the plaintiff claims. 
(Abstract of claim.) 
And whereas it has been represented to the said Court that it is necessary for the purposes of justice and for 
the due determination of the matters in dispute between the parties, that the following persons should be 
examined as witnesses upon oath touching such matters, that is to say : 
IUE. F., of 

 
247
IUG. H. ofand 
ٮ
IUI. J., ofU  
And it appearing that such witnesses are resident within the jurisdiction of your honourable Court; 
Now I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , as the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . of the said Court, have the honour to request, and do 
hereby request, that for the reasons aforesaid and for the assistance of the said Court, you, as the President 
and Judges of the said . . . . . . . . . . or some one or more of you, will be pleased to summon the said witness 
(and such other witnesses as the agents of the said plaintiff and defendant shall humbly request you in 
writing so to summon to attend at such time and place as you shall appoint before some one or more of you 
or such other person as according to the procedure of your Court is competent to take the examination of 
witnesses, and that you will cause such witnesses to be examined upon the interrogatories which 
accompany this letter of request (or viva voce) touching the said matters in question in the presence of the 
agents of the plaintiff and defendant, or such of them as shall, on due notice given, attend such examination. 
And I further have the honour to request that you will be pleased to cause the answers of the said witnesses 
to be reduced into writing, and all books, letters, papers and documents produced upon such examination to 
be duly marked for identification, and that you will be further pleased to authenticate such examination by the 
seal of your tribunal, or in such other way as is in accordance with your procedure, and to return the same, 
together with such request in writing, if any, for the examination of other witnesses to the said Court. 
(Note—If the request is directed to a Foreign Court, the words "through the Ministry of External Affairs of the 
Government of India for transmission" should be inserted after the words "other witnesses" in the last line of 
this form.) 
No. 9 
Commission for a Local Investigation, or to Examine Accounts 
(O. 26, Rules 9, 11) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas it is deemed requisite, for the purposes of this suit, that a commission for . . . . . . should be issued; 
You are hereby appointed Commissioner for the purpose of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
Process to compel the attendance before you of any witnesses, or for the production of any documents 
whom or which you may desire to examine or inspect, will be issued by any Court have jurisdiction on your 
application. 
A sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . , being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 10 
Commission to Make a Partition 
(O. 26, R. 13) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas it is deemed requisite for the purposes of this suit that a commission should be issued to make the 
partition or separation of the property specified in, and according to the rights as declared in, the decree of 
this Court, dated the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . .; You are hereby appointed Commissioner for the 
said purpose and are directed to make such inquiry as may be necessary, to divide the said property 
according to the best of your skill and judgment in the shares set out in the said decree, and to allot suh 
shares to the several parties. You are hereby authorized to award sums to be paid to any party by any other 
party for the purpose of equalizing the value of the shares. 

 
248
Process to compel the attendance before you of any witness or for the production of any documents, whom 
or which you may desire to examine or inspect, will be issued by any Court having jurisdiction on your 
application. 
A sum of Rs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , being your fee in the above, is herewith forwarded. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
[484][No. 11 
Notice to Certificated, Natural, or, BIde factoB Guardian 
(Order XXXII, Rule 3) 
(Title) 
To 
(Certificated/Natural/de factoGuardian) 
Whereas an application has been presented on the part of the plaintiff*/on behalf of the minor defendant* in 
the above suit for the appointment of a guardian for the suit for the minor defendant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , you 
(insert the name of the guardian appointed or declared by Court, or natural guardian, or the person in whose 
care the minor is) are hereby required to take notice that unless you appear before this Court on or before 
the day appointed for the hearing of the case and stated in the appended summons, and express you 
consent to act as guardian for the suit for the minor, the Court will proceed to appoint some other person to 
act as a guardian for the minor, for the purposes of the said suit. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., 
Judge. 
* Strike off the words which are not applicable. 
No. 11A 
Notice to Minor Defendant 
(Order XXXII, Rule 3) 
(Title) 
To 
Minor Defendant. 
Whereas an application has been presented on the part of the plaintiff in the above suit for the appointment 
of . . . . . . . *as guardian for the suit for you, the minor defendant, you are hereby required to take notice to 
appear in this Court in person on the . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . ., at . . . . . . . O'clock in the forenoon to 
show cause against the application, failing which the said application will be heard and determinedex parte. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge.] 
*Strike off the words which are not applicable. 
No. 12 
Notice to Opposite Party of Day Fixed for Hearing Evidence of Pauperism 
(O. 33, R. 6) 
(Title) 
To 

 
249
Whereas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . has applied to this Court for permission to institute a suit 
against . . . . . . .in forma pauperis under Order XXXIII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908; and whereas the 
Court sees no reason to reject the application; and whereas the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . has been 
fixed for receiving such evidence as the applicant may adduce in proof of his pauperism and for hearing any 
evidence which may be adduced in disproof thereof : 
Notice is hereby given to you under rule 6 of Order XXXIII that in case you may wish to offer any evidenace 
to disprove the pauperism of the applicant, you may do so on appearing in this Court on the said . . . . . . . 
day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . . 
Judge. 
No. 13 
Notice to Surety of his Liability Under a Decree 
(Section 145) 
(Title) 
To 
Whereas you . . . . . . . . . . . . . . did on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . become liable as surety for the performance of any 
decree which might be passed against the said . . . . . . . . . . . . . . defendant in the above suit; and whereas a 
decree was passed on the . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . 19 . . . . against the said defendant for the payment of . 
. . . . . . . ., and whereas application has been made for execution of the said decree against you : 
Take notice that you are hereby required on or before the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . .. . . . . . 
. 19 . . . . . . . . . . ., to show cause why the said decree should not be executed against you, and if no 
sufficient cause shall be, within the time specified, shown to the satisfaction of the Court, an order for its 
execution will be forthwith issued in the terms of the said application. 
Given under my hand and the seal of the Court, this . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . . 19 . . . .. 
Judge. 
No.14 
Register of Civil Suits 
(O.4, R. 2) 
Court of the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .of. . . . . . . . . . . . . . at. . . . . . . . .  
Register of Civil Suits in the year 19. . . . . . . . 
Date of presentation of plaintiff 
Number of suit 
plaintiff 
Defendant 
Claim 
Appearance 
Judgment 
Appeal 
Execution 
Return of Execution 
Name 

 
250
Description  
Place of residence 
Name 
Description 
Place of residence 
Particulars 
Amount of value 
When the casue of acti0on accrued 
Day for parties to appear 
Plaintiff 
Defendant 
Date 
For whom 
For what, or amount 
Date of decision of appeal 
Judgment in appeal 
Date of application 
Date of order  
Against whom 
For what and amount, if money 
Amount of costs 
Amount paid in Court 
Arrested 
Minute of other Return than Payment of Arrest, and date to every Return 
Note—Where there are numerous plaintiff, or numerous defendants, the name of the first plainfif only, or the 
first defendant only, as the case may be, need be entered in the register. 
No. 15 
Register of Appeals 
(O. 41, R. 9) 
Court (or High Court) at 
Register of Appeals from Decrees in the year. . . . . . . .  
Date of memorandum 
Number of appeal 
Appellant 
Respondent 
Decree appealed from 

 
251
Appearance 
Judgment 
Name 
Description 
Place of residence 
Name 
Description 
Place of residence 
Of what court 
Particulars 
Amount or value 
Day for parties to appear 
Appellant 
Respondent 
Date 
Confirmed, reserved or varied 
For what or amount 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.—[Arbitration.]Rep. by the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)s. 49(1)and Third 
Sch. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.—[Execution of Decrees by Collectors.]Rep. by the Code of Civil Procedure 
(Amendment)Act, 1956 (66of 1956),s. 15. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.—[Enactments amended.]Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1952 (48 of 
1952),s. 2and Sch. I. 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.—[Enactments repealed.]Rep. by the Second Repealing and Amending Act, 1914 
(17of 1914),s. 3and Sch. II.  
THE CODE OF CIVIL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1976 
(104 of 1976) 
(Extracts) 
CHAPTER V 
REPEAL AND SAVINGS 
97. Repeal and savings.—(1) Any amendment made, or any provision inserted in the principal Act by State 
Legislature or a High Court before the commencement of this Act shall except in so far as such amendment 
or provision is consistent with the provisions of the principal Act as amended by this Act, stand repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding that the provisions of this Act have come into force or the repeal under sub-section (1) 
has taken effect, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses 
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897),— 
(a) the amendment made to clause (2) of section 2 of the principal Act by section 3 of this Act shall not affect 
any appeal against the determination of any such question as is referred to in section 47 and every such 
appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 3 had not come into force; 

 
252
(b) the provisions of section 20 of the principal Act, as amended by section 7 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any suit pending immediately before the commencement of the said section; and every such suit shall 
be tried as if the said section 7 had not come into force; 
(c) the provisions of section 20 of the principal Act, as amended by section 8 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any suit pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 8; and every such suit 
shall be tried as if the said section 8 had not come into force; 
(d) the provisions of section 25 of the principal Act, as substituted by section 11 of this Act, shall not apply to 
or affect any suit, appeal or other proceeding wherein any report has been made under the provisions of 
section 25 before the commencement of the said section 11; and every such suit, appeal or other proceeding 
shall be tried as if the said section 11 had not come into force; 
(e) the provisions section 34 of the principal Act, as amended by section 13 of this Act, shall not affect the 
rate at which interest may be allowed on a decree in any suit instituted before the commencement of the said 
section 13 and interest on a decree passed in such suit shall be ordered in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 34 as they stood before the commencement of the said section 13 as if the said section 13 had not 
come into force; 
(f) the provisions of section 35A of the principal Act, as amended by section 14 of this Act, shall not apply to 
or affect any proceedings for revision, pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 
14; and every such proceedings shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 14 had not come 
into force; 
(g) the provisions of section 60 of the principal Act, as amended by section 23 of this Act, shall not apply to 
any attachment made before the commencement of the said section 23; 
(h) the amendment of section 80 of the principal Act by section 27 of this Act shall not apply to or affect any 
suit instituted before the commencement of the said section 27; and every such suit shall be dealt with as if 
section 80 had not been amended by the said section 27; 
(i) the provisions of section 82 of the principal Act, as amended by section 28 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any decree passed against the Union of India or a State or, as the case may be, a public officer, before 
the commencement of the said section 28 or to the execution of any such decree; and every such decree or 
execution shall be dealt with as if the said section 28 had not come into force; 
(j) the provisions of section 91 of the principal Act, as amended by section 30 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any suit, appeal or proceeding instituted or filed before the commencement of the said section 30; and 
every such suit, appeal or proceeding shall be disposed of as if the said section 30 had not come into force; 
(k) the provisions of section 92 of the principal Act, as amended by section 31 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any suit, appeal or proceeding instituted or filed before the commencement of the said section 31; and 
every such suit, appeal or proceeding shall be disposed of as if the said section 31 had not come into force; 
(l) the provisions of section 96 of the principal Act, as amended by section 33 of this Act, shall not apply to or 
affect any appeal against the decree passed in any suit instituted before the commencement of the said 
section 33; and every such suit, appeal or proceeding shall be disposed of as if the said section 33 had not 
come into force; 
(m) the provisions of section 100 of the principal Act, as substituted by section 37 of this Act, shall not apply 
to or affect any appeal from an appellate decree or order which had been admitted, before the 
commencement of the said section 37, after hearing under rule 11 of Order XLI; and every such admitted 
appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 37 had not come into force; 
(n) section 100A, as inserted in the principal Act, by section 38 of this Act, shall not apply to or affect any 
appeal against the decision of a single Judge of a High Court under any Letters Patent which had been 
admitted before the commencement of the said section 38; and every such admitted appeal shall be 
disposed of as if the said section 38 had not come into force; 
(o) the amendment of section 115 of the principal Act by section 43 of this Act shall not apply to or affect any 
proceeding for revision which had been admitted, after preliminary hearing, before the commencement of the 
said section 43; and every such proceeding for revision shall be disposed of as if the said section 43 had not 
come into force; 

 
253
(p) the provisions of section 141 of the principal Act, as amended by section 47 of this Act shall not apply to 
or affect any proceeding which is pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 47; and 
every such proceeding shall be dealt with as if the said section 47 had not come into force; 
(q) the provisions of rules 31, 32, 48A, 57 to 59, 90 and 97 to 103 of Order XXI of the First Schedule as 
amended or, as the case may be substituted or inserted by section 72 of this Act shall not apply to or affect— 
(i) any attachment subsisting immediately before the commencement of the said section 72, or 
(ii) any suit instituted before such commencement under rule 63 aforesaid to establish right to attached 
property or under rule 103 aforesaid to establish possession, or 
(iii) any proceeding to set aside the sale of any immovable property, 
and every such attachment, suit or proceeding shall be continued as if the said section 72 had not come into 
force; 
(r) the provisions of rule 4 of Order XXII of the First Schedule, as substituted by section 73 of this Act shall 
not apply to any order of abatement made before the commencement of the said section 73; 
(s) the amendment, as well as substitution, made in Order XXIII of the First Schedule by section 74 of this 
Act shall not apply to any suit or proceeding pending before the commencement fo the said section 74; 
(t) the provisions of rules 5A and 5B of Order XXVII, as inserted by section 76 of this Act, shall not apply to 
any suit, pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 76 against the Government or 
any public officer; and every such suti shall be dealt with as if the said section 76 had come into force; 
(u) the provisions of rules 1A, 2A and 3 of Order XXVIIA, as inserted or substituted, as the case may be, by 
section 77 of this Act shall not apply to or affect any suit which is pending before the commencement of the 
said section 77; 
(v) rules 2A, 3A and 15 of Order XXXII of the First Schedule, as amended, or as the case may be, 
substituted by section 79 of this Act, shall not apply to a suit pending at the commencement of the said 
section 79 and every such suit shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 79 had not come into 
force; 
(w) the provisions of Order XXXIII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 81 of this Act, shall not apply 
to or affect any suit or proceeding pending before the commencement of the said section 81 for permission 
to sue as a pauper; and every such suit or proceeding shall be dealt with and disposed of as if the said 
section 81 had not come into force; 
(x) the provisions of Order XXXVII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 84 of this Act, shall not 
apply to any suit pending before the commencement of the said section 84; and every such suit shall be 
dealt with and disposed of as if the said section 84 had not come into force; 
(y) the provisions of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule, as amended by section 86 of this Act, shall not apply 
to or affect any injunction subsisting immediately before the commencement of the said section 86; and 
every suh injunction and proceeding for dis-obedience of such injunction shall be dealt with as if the said 
section 86 had not come into force; 
(z) the provisions of Order XLI of the First Schedule, as amended by section 87 of this Act, shall not apply to 
or affect any appeal pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 87; and every such 
appeal shall be disposed of as if the said section 87 had not come into force; 
(za) the provisions of Order XLII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 88 of this Act, shall not apply 
to or affect any appeal from an appellate decree or order which had been admitted, before the 
commencement of the said section 88, after hearing under rule 11 of Order XLI; and every such admitted 
appeal shall be dealt with as if the said section 88 had not come into force; 
(zb) the provisions of Order XLIII of the First Schedule, as amended by section 89 of this Act, shall not apply 
to any appeal against any order pending immediately before the commencement of the said section 89; and 
every such appeal shall be disposed of as if the said section 89 had not come into force. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, 
shall apply to every suit, proceeding, appeal or application, pending at the commencement of this Act or 

 
254
instituted or filed after such commencement, notwithstanding the fact that the right, or cause of action, in 
pursuance of which such suit proceeding, appeal or application is instituted or filed, had been acquired or 
had accrued before such commencement. 
  
  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
[1] Omitted by Act No. 19 of 1988. 
[2] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 Sec. 93, for "a decree for the balance" (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
[3] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) 
* Strike off the words which are not applicable. 
* Strike off the words which are not applicable. 
  
  
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
[1]. 1. This Act has been amended in its application to Assam by Assam Act 2 of 1941 and 8 of 1953; to 
Tamil Nadu by Madras Act 34 of 1950, Madras A.O. 1950, and Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1970; to Punjab by 
Punjab Act 7 of1934; to Uttar Pradesh by U.P. Act 4 of 1925, 35 of 1948, 24 of 1954, 17 of 1970, 57 of 1976 
and 31 of 1978; to Karnataka by Mysore Act 14 of 1955; to Kerala by Kerala Act 13 of 1957; to Rajasthan by 
Rajasthan Act 19 of 1958; to Maharashtra by Maharashtra Acts 22 of 1970; It has been extended to Berar by 
the Bearar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) and, by notification under Secs, 5 and 5A of the Schedule Districts 
Acts, 1874 (14 of 1874), also to the following Schedule Districts:— 
(1) The District of Jalpaiguri, Cachar (edcluding the North Cachar Hills), Goalpara (including the Easter 
Duars), Kamrup, Darrang, Nowgong (excluding the North Cachar Hills), Coalkpara (including the Eastern 
Durs), Kamrup, Darrange, Nowgong (excluding the Mikir Hill Tracts), Sibsagar (excluding the Mikir Hill 
Tracts) and Lakhimpur (excluding the Dibrugarh Frontier Tract). Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p.5 and ibid, 
1914, Pt. I, p. 1690. 
(2) The Distirct of Darjeeling and the District of Hazaribagh, Ranchi, Palamua and Manbhum in Chota 
Nagpur: 
Calcutta Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p.25 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p.33. 
(3) The province of Kumaon and Garhwal and the Tarai Paraganas (with modification) : U.P. Gazette, 1909, 
Pt. I, p. 3 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt, I, p. 31. 
(4) The Pargana of Jaunsar.Bawar in Dehra Dun and the Scheduled portion of the Mirzapur District : U.P. 
Gazette, 1909. Pt. I, p.4 and Gazette of Inida, 1909, Pt, I, p. 32. 
(5) Coorg: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt, I, p.32. 
(6) Scheduled Districts in the Punjab: Gazette of India, Pt. I, p.33. 
(7) Section 36 to 43 to all the Scheduled Districts in Madras: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p. 152. 
(8) Scheduled Districts in the C.P. except so much as is already in force and so much as authorizes the 
attachment and sale of immovable property in execution of a decree, not being a decree directing the sale of 
such property: 
Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. I, p.239. 
(9) Anmer.Merwara except Section 1 and 155 to 158: Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. II, p. 480. 
(10) Pargana Dhalbhum, the Municipality of Chaibassa in the Kolhan and the Porahat Estate in the District of 
Singhbjum: Calcutta Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 453 and Gazette of India, 1909, Pt. II. p. 443. 

 
255
Under Sect 3(3) (a) of the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation (3 of 1872), Secs. 38 to 42 and 156 and 
rules 4 to 9 in Order XXI in the First Schedule have been declared to be in force in the Sonthal Parganas and 
the rest of the Code for the trial of suits referred to in Section 10 of the Sonthal Parganas Justice Regulation, 
1893 (5 of 1893) : see Calcutta Gazette, 1909, Pt. I, p. 45. 
It has been declared to be in force in Panth Piploda by the Panth Piploda Laws Regulation, 1929 (1 of 1929), 
Sec. 2; in the Khondmals District by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 1936), Sec. 3 and Sch. And 
in the Angul district by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), Sec. 3 and Sch. 
It has been extended to the Districts of Koraput and Gangam Agency by Orissa Regulation, (5 of 1951) Sec. 
2. 
It has been extended to the State of Manipur (w.e.f. 1.1.1957) by Act 30 of 1950, s. 3 to the whole of the 
Union territory of Lakshadweep (w.e.f. 1.10.1967) by Regulation 8 of 1965, Sec. 3 and Sch.; to Goa, Daman 
and Diu (w.e.f. 15.6.1966) by Act 30 of 1965, Sec. 3; to Dadra and Nagar Haveli (w.e.f. 1.7.1965) by Reg. 6 
of 1963, Sec. 2 and Sch. I and to the State of Sikkim, (w.e.f. 1.9.1984), vide Notification No. S.O. 599, (E), 
dated 13.8.1984. 
[2] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 Sec. 2 for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[3] The words and figures "Section 47 or" omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[4] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "Indian Civil Service" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[5] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "77 and 155 to 158" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[6] Explanation renumbered as Explanation I thereof by Act No. 104 of 1976, Sec. 5 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[7] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[8] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[9] Explanation I omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[10] Subs. Act No. 104 of 1976 for Explanation II (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[11] Section 21 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[12] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[13] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[14] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "thereafter tries such suit" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[15] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for sub-section (3) (w.e.f.1.2. 1977). 
[16] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[17] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for s. 25 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[18] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.5.1977). 
[19] Added by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.7.1977). 
[20] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "excluding an appeal" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[21] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "one thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[22] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[23] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for s. 36 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[24] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, s. 18. (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[25] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[26] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[27] Sectin 42 renumbered as sub-sectin(1) hereof Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 

 
256
[28] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977) 
[29] Sub-section (2) omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[30] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for the former Explanation (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[31] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[32] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[33] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for cl. (b) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[34] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[35] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, s. 22, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[36] For amendments to s. 60, in its application to East Punjab, see the Punjab Relief of Indebtedness Act, 
1934 (Pun. Act 7 of 1934), s. 35, as amended by Pun. acts No 12 of 1940 and 6 of 1942. 
[37] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for "an agriculturist" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[38] Ins by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[39] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[40] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for the proviso (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[41] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for cl. (j) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[42] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[43] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[44] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for Explanation I (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[45] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f.1.2. 1977). 
[46] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "3" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[47] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[48] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[49] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[50] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[51] Omitted by Act No. 45 of 1988 (w.e.f. 19.5.1988). 
[52] Ins. by Act No. 20 of 1983 (w.e.f. 15.3.1984). 
[53] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[54] Sec. 80 renumbered as sub-section (1) of that section by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[55] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "No suit shall be instituted' (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[56] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[57] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[58] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "such report" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[59] The words "Ruler of a" omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[60] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "a Ruler" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[61] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "the Rule" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[62] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "the Rule" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 

 
257
[63] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for "him" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[64] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "himself" (w.e.f. 1. 2.1977). 
[65] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "him" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[66] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[67] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[68] Cl. (a) re.lettered as cl. (aa) by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[69] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[70] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[71] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[72] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for the former heading (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[73] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[74] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for consent in writing of the Advocate.General" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[75] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[76] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "expense or injury caused to him" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[77] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[78] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[79] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[80] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[81] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[82] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for s. 100 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[83] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[84] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "one thousand rupees" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[85] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for s. 103 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[86] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[87] Certain words omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[88] Sec. 115 re.numbered as sub-section (1) of that section by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[89] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[90] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[91] The word "and" omitted by Act No. 38 of 1978. 
[92] Cl. (d) omitted by Act No. 38 of 1978. 
[93] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "Chief Justice or Chief Judge" (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[94] Proviso omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[95] Subs by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "Chief Justice or Chief Judge" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[96] Subs by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "Chief Justice or Chief Judge" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[97] Subs by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "Chief Justice or Chief Judge" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[98] Sub-section (2) omitted by Act No. 66 of 1966. 

 
258
[99] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[100] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[101] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[102] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[103] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[104] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[105] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[106] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[107] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[108] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.5.1977). 
[109] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[110] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for the former rule (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[111] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for the former rule (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[112] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[113] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for former rule (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[114] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[115] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[116] See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), s. 21. 
[117] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[118] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "the suit"(w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[119] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 6 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[120] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[121] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[122] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for sub.rule (3) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[123] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[124] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[125] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[126] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for rule 15 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[127] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[128] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[129] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[130] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for "resides in Pakistan" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[131] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[132] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 26 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[133] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[134] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 

 
259
[135] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for rule 16 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[136] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[137] Added by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[138] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[139] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[140] This rule has been applied to suits for the recovery of rent under the Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 
(Ben. 6 of 1908) s. 265. 
[141] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[142] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[143] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[144] Added by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[145] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for the former heading (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[146] Rule 1 renumbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[147] Certain words omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[148] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[149] Rule 5 renumbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[150] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[151] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[152] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[153] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[154] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[155] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[156] Subs by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[157] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[158] Ins by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[159] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[160] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) for the former proviso. 
[161] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[162] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "three months" (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[163] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for clause (a) (w.e.f 1.2. 1977). 
[164] Added by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[165] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[166] Sub. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for rule 2, (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[167] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[168] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[169] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 

 
260
[170] Rule 21 renumbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[171] Subs. by Act No.104 of 1976 for "an order may be made accordingly" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[172] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[173] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "to admit any document" (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[174] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[175] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 6 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[176] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[177] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[178] Rule 2 renumbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[179] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[180] Subs by Act No. 104 of 1976, for the proviso (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[181] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[182] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[183] Rule 2 renumbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[184] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[185] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[186] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for rule 1A (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[187] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[188] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[189] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[190] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for sub.rule (1) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[191] Rule 12 renumbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[192] Ins by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[193] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[194] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "fifty" (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[195] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "two hundred miles" (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[196] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[197] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[198] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for the previous proviso (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[199] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2. 1977). 
[200] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[201] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[202] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[203] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for the former rule 5 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[204] The provisions of rules, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16 so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P 4 of 1925). 

 
261
[205] The provisions of rules, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15 and 16 so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P 4 of 1025). 
[206] The provisions of rules, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15 and 16 so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P 4 of 1025). 
[207] The provisions of rules, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 15 and 16 so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P 4 of 1025). 
[208] Ins. by Act No.104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[209] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 9 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[210] The provisions of rules, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16 so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P 4 of 1925). 
[211] The provisions of rules, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16 so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh, see the Oudh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P 4 of 1925). 
[212] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for the former rule (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[213] The provisions of rule 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16, so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence, are not applicable to the Chief Court of Outh, see the Outh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925). 
[214] The provisions of rule 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16, so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence, are not applicable to the Chief Court of Outh, see the Outh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925). 
[215] The provisions of rule 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16, so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence, are not applicable to the Chief Court of Outh, see the Outh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925). 
[216] The provisions of rule 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15 and 16, so far as they relate to the manner of taking 
evidence, are not applicable to the Chief Court of Outh, see the Outh Courts Act, 1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925). 
[217] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[218] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[219] The provisions of rules 1, 3, 4 and 5 are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh; see the Outh Court 
Act, 1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925), s. 16(2). 
[220] Rule 1 renumbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[221] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[222] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[223] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "A Judge may" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[224] The provisions of rules 1, 3, 4, and 5 are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh; see the Oudh 
Courts Act, 1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925). 
[225] The provisions of rules 1, 3, 4, and 5 are not applicable to the Chief Court of Oudh; see the Oudh 
Courts Act, 1925 (U.P. 4 of 1925). 
[226] The provisions of rules 1, 3, 4 and 5 are not applicable to the Chief of Oudh; see the Outh Courts Act, 
1925 (U.P 4 of 1925). 
[227] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[228] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "names and descriptions of the parties" (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[229] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[230] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[231] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for cl. (b) (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[232] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 

 
262
[233] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[234] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[235] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[236] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[237] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[238] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, s. 72, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[239] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[240] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[241] In the application of the Act, to Punjab, sub.rule (3) has been repealed by the Punjab Relief of 
Indebtedness Act, 1934 (Pun. 7 of 1934). 
[242] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for rule 5 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[243] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for sub.clause (ii) (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[244] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[245] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[246] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[247] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[248] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for "one year" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[249] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[250] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[251] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "one year" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "one 
year" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[252] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "one year" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "one 
year" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[253] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[254] Subs. by Act No. 38 of 1978, for "the last preceding rule". 
[255] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 s. 72, for sub.rule (3) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[256] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "the Court may require" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[257] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[258] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[259] Subs by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "six months" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977).  
[260] Subs by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "Six month" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[261] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "one year" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[262] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for "one year" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[263] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for sub.rule (6) (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[264] Rule 41 renumbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[265] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for "in the case of a corporation" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[266] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976. 

 
263
[267] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[268] Ss. 46A to 46I Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[269] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[270] Subs. by Act. No. 104 of 1976, for sub.rule (3) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[271] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for Explanation (w.e.f. 1. 2.1977). 
[272] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[273] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[274] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[275] Subs. by Act. No. 104 of 1976, for sub.clause (ii) (w.e.f. 1. 2.1977). 
[276] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[277] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[278] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976. 
[279] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, for rule 57 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[280] Subs. by Act. No. 104 of 1976, for the heading and rules 58 to 63 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[281] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[282] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[283] Subs. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 for "thirty days" (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[284] Subs. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 for "fifteen days" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[285] Subs. by Act. No. 104 of 1976, for "seven" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[286] Ins. by Act. No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[287] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[288] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 90 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[289] Added by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[290] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "the Court shall make an order setting aside the sale" (w.e.f. 
1.2.1977). 
[291] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[292] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for sub.rule (2) (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[293] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for rules 98 to 103 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977)  
[294] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[295] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[296] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 
[297] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 
[298] See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), bs. 4 and 5. 
[299] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[300] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 
[301] Subs. bs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 

 
264
[302] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, s. 74 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[303] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, s. 74 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[304] Subs. by for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[305] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, s. 74 (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 
[306] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, s. 74 (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 
[307] Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[308] Ins. by Act 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1976) 
[309] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "for the examination of" (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[310] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[311] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[312] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[313] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[314] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[315] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[316] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for "16, 17 and 18" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[317] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 
[318] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[319] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[320] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[321] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 3 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[322] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[323] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for the proviso (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[324] Subs. by Act No. 10 of 1976 for rule 8 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[325] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[326] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[327] Ins. by Act 104 No. of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[328] The words "to the minor and" omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976. 
[329] The words "to the minor and" omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976. 
[330] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1. 2.1977). 
[331] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[332] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[333] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[334] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[335] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[336] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[337] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 15 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 

 
265
[338] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 for rule 16 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[339] Order XXXIIA Ins. by Sec. 80 Act 104 of 1976 for rule (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[340] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "Suits by Paupers" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[341] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[342] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for the former Explanation (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[343] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[344] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[345] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977).  
[346] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[347] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[348] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[349] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[350] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[351] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[352] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[353] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[354] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[355] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[356] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[357] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[358] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[359] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1. 2.1977). 
[360] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[361] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[362] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[363] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[364] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[365] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[366] Subs. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 for "pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[367] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[368] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "the last preceding rule" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[369] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "the last preceeding rule" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[370] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "on application by him" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[371] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[372] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[373] Renumbered as sub.rule (1) of rule 15 by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 

 
266
[374] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[375] Ins. by Act No. of 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[376] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "The agreement" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[377] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 "it was presented" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[378] Ins. by Act No 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[379] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 1 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[380] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[381] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 3 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[382] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[383] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for rule 8 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[384] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[385] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for "defraud" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[386] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[387] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[388] Sub.rules (3) and (4) omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1.2.1977). 
[389] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f.1-2-1977). 
[390] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[391] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[392] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[393] The words "after notice to the defendant" omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1977). 
[394] The words "after notice to the defendant" omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1977). 
[395] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[396] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (1.2.1977). 
[397] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[398] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[399] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[400] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[401] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[402] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[403] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[404] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[405] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[406] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[407] Rule 20 re.numbered as sub.rule (1) by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[408] Ins.by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[409] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 

 
267
[410] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[411] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 2.2.1977). 
[412] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (1.2. 1977). 
[413] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[414] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1977). 
[415] Rule 30 re.numbered as sub.rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[416] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[417] Rule 30 re-numbered as sub-rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
[418] Ins. by Act No. 9 of 1992, s. 4, which under s. 1(2) thereof, may be brought into force in any State by 
the State Government, on an specified date. The Act has been brought into force in Bombay, Bengal U.P., 
Punjab,Bihar, C.P. Assam, Orissa and Tamil Nadu. 
[419] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 
[420] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[421] Clauses (b) omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[422] Clauses (b), (c), (g) (h) (m) (o)and (v) omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[423] Clauses (b), (c), (g) (h) (m) (o)and (v) omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[424] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1976). 
[425] Clauses (m), (o) and (v) omitted by s. 89, ibid. (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[426] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[427] Clauses (b), (c), (g) (h) (m) (o)and (v) omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[428] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[429] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[430] Clauses (b), (c), (g) (h) (m) (o)and (v) omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[431] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f 1.2.1976). 
[432] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for "PAUPER APPEALS" (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[433] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 "as pauper" (w.e.f. 1.2.1976) 
[434] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 "pauper" and "paupers" respectively (w.e.f. 1.2.1976) 
[435] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976 "pauper" and "pauper" respectively (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[436] Sub-rule (2) Omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[437] Subs. by Act. No. 104 of 1976 for rule 2 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977) 
[438] Rule 2 renumbered as sub-rule (1) of that rule by Act No. 104 if 1976 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
[439] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[440] Subs. by Act No. 49 of 1973 for sub.rule (1). 
[441] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2. 1977). 
[442] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976 for sub. rule (1) w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[443] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, Sec. 93, for paragraph 2 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[444] Added by Act 104 of 1976, Sec. 93 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 

 
268
[445] See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963). 
[446] See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963). 
[447] see now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963). 
[448] See now the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963). 
[449] See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925). 
[450] See now the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (36 of 1936). 
[451] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, for certain words (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[452] Subs. by Act 104 of 1976, for Form No. 4 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[453] Words not required to be deleted. 
[454] Words not required to be deleted. 
[455] Words not required to be deleted. 
[456] Words not required to be deleted. 
[457] Words not required to be deleted. 
[458] Words not required to be deleted. 
[459] Words not required to be deleted. 
[460] Words not required to be deleted. 
[461] Words not required to be deleted. 
[462] Words not required to be deleted. 
[463] Words not required to be deleted. 
[464] Words not required to be deleted. 
[465] Words not required to be deleted. 
[466] Words not required to be deleted. 
[467] Words not required to be deleted. 
[468] Words not required to be deleted. 
[469] Words not required to be deleted. 
[470] Words not required to be deleted. 
[471] Words not required to be deleted. 
[472] Words not required to be deleted. 
[473] Here insert name of proper officer. 
[474] Here insert name of proper officer. 
[475] Here insert name of proper officer,  
[476] If partial, strike out "no" and state to what extent. 
[477] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[478] The word "annas" omitted by Act No. 104 of 1976, (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[479] Ins. by Act 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[480] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 

 
269
[481] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[482] Subs. by Act No. 49 of 1973, for the former paragraph. 
[483] Ins. by Act No. 104 of 1976 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
[484] Subs. by Act No. 104 of 1976, for Form 11 (w.e.f. 1.2.1977). 
 

 
1 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions. 
3. Construction of references. 
4. Trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and other laws. 
5. Saving. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES 
6. Classes of Criminal Courts. 
7. Territorial divisions. 
8. Metropolitan areas. 
9. Court of Session.  
10. Subordination of Assistant Sessions Judges. 
11. Courts of Judicial Magistrates. 
12. Chief Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, etc. 
13. Special Judicial Magistrates. 
14. Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates.  
15. Subordination of Judicial Magistrates. 
16. Courts of Metropolitan Magistrates. 
17. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate. 
18. Special Metropolitan Magistrates. 
19. Subordination of Metropolitan Magistrates. 
20. Executive Magistrates. 
21. Special Executive Magistrates. 
22. Local Jurisdiction of Executive Magistrates. 
23. Subordination of Executive Magistrates. 
24. Public Prosecutors. 
25. Assistant Public Prosecutors. 
25A. Directorate of Prosecution. 
CHAPTER III 
POWER OF COURTS 
26. Courts by which offences are triable.  
27. Jurisdiction in the case of juveniles.  

2 
 
SECTIONS 
28. Sentences which High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass. 
29.  Sentences which Magistrates may pass. 
30.  Sentence of imprisonment in default of fine. 
31.  Sentence in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial. 
32.  Mode of conferring powers. 
33.  Powers of officers appointed. 
34.  Withdrawal of powers. 
35.  Powers of Judges and Magistrates exercisable by their successors-in-office. 
CHAPTER IV 
A.–POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE 
36.  Powers of superior officers of police. 
B.–AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE 
37.  Public when to assist Magistrates and police. 
38.  Aid to person, other than police officer, executing warrant. 
39.  Public to give information of certain offences. 
40.  Duty of officers employed, in connection with the affairs of a village to make certain report. 
CHAPTER V 
ARREST OF PERSONS 
41.  When police may arrest without warrant. 
41A. Notice of appearance before police officer. 
41B. Procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest. 
41C. Control room at districts. 
41D. Right of arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation. 
42.  Arrest on refusal to give name and residence. 
43.  Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest. 
44.  Arrest by Magistrate. 
45.  Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest.  
46.  Arrest how made. 
47.  Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested. 
48.  Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions. 
49.  No unnecessary restraint. 
50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail. 
50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to a nominated person. 
51.  Search of arrested person. 

3 
 
SECTIONS 
52.  Power to seize offensive weapons. 
53.  Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer. 
53A.  Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner. 
54.  Examination of arrested person by medical officer. 
54A.  Identification of person arrested. 
55.  Procedure when police officer deputes subordinate to arrest without warrant. 
55A.  Health and safety of arrested person. 
56.  Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in charge of police station. 
57.  Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four hours. 
58.  Police to report apprehensions. 
59.  Discharge of person apprehended. 
60.  Power, on escape, to pursue and retake. 
60A.  Arrest to be made strictly according to the Code. 
CHAPTER VI 
PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE 
A.–Summons 
61.  Form of summons. 
62. Summons how served. 
63. Service of summons on corporate bodies and societies. 
64.  Service when persons summoned cannot be found. 
65.  Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided. 
66.  Service on Government servant. 
67.  Service of summons outside local limits. 
68.  Proof of service in such cases and when serving officer not present. 
69.  Service of summons on witness by post. 
B.–Warrant of arrest 
70.  Form of warrant of arrest and duration. 
71.  Power to direct security to be taken. 
72.  Warrants to whom directed. 
73.  Warrant may be directed to any person. 
74.  Warrant directed to police officer. 
75.  Notification of substance of warrant.  
76.  Person arrested to be brought before Court without delay. 
77.  Where warrant may be executed. 
78.  Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction. 
79.  Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside jurisdiction. 
80.  Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued. 

4 
 
SECTIONS 
81.  Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested is brought. 
C.–Proclamation and attachment 
82.  Proclamation for person absconding. 
83. Attachment of property of person absconding. 
84.  Claims and objections to attachment. 
85.  Release, sale and restoration of attached property. 
86.  Appeal from order rejecting application for restoration of attached property. 
D.–Other rules regarding processes 
87. Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons. 
88.  Power to take bond for appearance. 
89. Arrest on breach of bond for appearance. 
90.  Provisions of this Chapter generally applicable to summonses and warrants of arrest. 
CHAPTER VII 
PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS 
A.–Summons to produce 
91. Summons to produce document or other thing. 
92. Procedure as to letters and telegrams. 
B.–Search-warrants 
93. When search-warrant may be issued. 
94.  Search of place suspected to contain stolen property, forged documents, etc. 
95. Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to issue search-warrants for the same. 
96. Application to High Court to set aside declaration of forfeiture. 
97. Search for persons wrongfully confined. 
98. Power to compel restoration of abducted females. 
C.–General provisions relating to searches 
99. Direction, etc., of search-warrants. 
100. Persons in charge of closed place to allow search. 
101.  Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction. 
D.–Miscellaneous 
102. Power of police officer to seize certain property.  
103. Magistrate may direct search in his presence. 
104. Power to impound document, etc., produced. 
105. Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes. 
CHAPTER VIIA 
RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR 
ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY 
 
105A. Definitions. 
105B. Assistance in securing transfer of persons. 

5 
 
SECTIONS 
105C. Assistance in relation to orders of attachment or forfeiture of property. 
105D. Identifying unlawfully acquired property. 
105E. Seizure or attachment of property. 
105F. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter. 
105G. Notice of forfeiture of property. 
105H. Forfeiture of property in certain cases.  
105-I. Fine in lieu of forfeiture. 
105J.  Certain transfers to be null and void. 
105K. Procedure in respect of letter of request. 
105L. Application of this Chapter. 
CHAPTER VIII 
SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR 
106. Security for keeping the peace on conviction. 
107. Security for keeping the peace in other cases. 
108. Security for good behaviour from persons disseminating seditious matters.  
109. Security for good behaviour from suspected persons.  
110. Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders. 
111. Order to be made. 
112. Procedure in respect of person present in Court. 
113. Summons or warrant in case of person not so present. 
114. Copy of order to accompany summons or warrant. 
115. Power to dispense with personal attendance. 
116. Inquiry as to truth of information. 
117. Order to give security. 
118. Discharge of person informed against. 
119. Commencement of period for which security is required. 
120. Contents of bond. 
121. Power to reject sureties.  
122. Imprisonment in default of security. 
123. Power to release persons imprisoned for failing to give security. 
124. Security for unexpired period of bond. 
CHAPTER IX 
ORDER  FOR  MAINTENANCE OF  WIVES, CHILDREN AND  PARENTS 
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents. 
126. Procedure. 
127. Alteration in allowance. 
128. Enforcement of order of maintenance.  

6 
 
CHAPTER X 
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY 
A.–Unlawful assemblies 
SECTIONS 
129.  Dispersal of assembly by use of civil force. 
130.  Use of armed forces to disperse assembly. 
131.  Power of certain armed force officers to disperse assembly. 
132.  Protection against prosecution for acts done under preceding sections. 
B.–Public nuisances 
133.  Conditional order for removal of nuisance. 
134.  Service or notification of order. 
135.  Person to whom order is addressed to obey or show cause. 
136.  Consequences of his failing to do so. 
137.  Procedure where existence of public right is denied. 
138.  Procedure where he appears to show cause. 
139.  Power of Magistrate to direct local investigation and examination of an expert. 
 
140.  Power of Magistrate to furnish written instructions, etc. 
141.  Procedure on order being made absolute and consequences of disobedience.  
142. Injunction pending inquiry. 
143. Magistrate may prohibit repetition or continuance of public nuisance. 
C.–Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger 
144.  Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger. 
144A.Power to prohibit carrying arms in procession or mass drill or mass training with arms. 
D.–Disputes as to immovable property 
145.  Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace. 
146.  Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint receiver. 
147.  Dispute concerning right of use of land or water. 
148.  Local inquiry. 
CHAPTER XI 
PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE 
149.  Police to prevent cognizable offences. 
150.  Information of design to commit cognizable offences. 
151.  Arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences. 
152.  Prevention of injury to public property. 
153.  Inspection of weights and measures. 
CHAPTER XII 
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE 
154. Information in cognizable cases. 
155. Information as to non-cognizable cases and investigation of such cases. 

7 
 
SECTIONS 
156. Police officer’s power to investigate cognizable case. 
157. Procedure for investigation. 
158. Report how submitted. 
159. Power to hold investigation or preliminary inquiry. 
160. Police officer’s power to require attendance of witnesses. 
161. Examination of witnesses by police. 
162.  Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence. 
163. No inducement to be offered. 
164. Recording of confessions and statements. 
164A. Medical examination of the victim of rape. 
165. Search by police officer.  
166. When officer in charge of police station may require another to issue search-warrant.  
166A. Letter of request to competent authority for investigation in a country or place outside India.  
166B. Letter of request from a country or place outside India to a Court or an authority for 
investigation in India. 
167.  Procedure when  investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours. 
168. Report of investigation by subordinate police officer. 
169. Release of accused when evidence deficient. 
170. Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient. 
171. Complainant and witnesses not to be required to accompany police officer and not to be 
subjected to restraint. 
172.  Diary of proceedings in investigation. 
173.  Report of police officer on completion of investigation. 
174.  Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc. 
175.  Power to summon persons. 
176.  Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death. 
CHAPTER XIII 
JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 
177. Ordinary place of inquiry and trial. 
178. Place of inquiry or trial. 
179. Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues. 
180. Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation to other offence. 
181. Place of trial in case of certain offences. 
182. Offences committed by letters, etc. 
183. Offence committed on journey or voyage. 
184. Place of trial for offences triable together. 
185. Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions. 
186.  High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district where inquiry or trial shall take place. 
187.  Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed beyond local jurisdiction. 

8 
 
SECTIONS 
188. Offence committed outside India. 
189.  Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside India. 
CHAPTER XIV 
CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS 
190.  Cognizance of offences by Magistrates. 
191. Transfer on application of the accused. 
192. Making over of cases to Magistrates. 
193. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session. 
194. Additional and Assistant Sessions Judges to try cases made over to them. 
195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences against public 
justice and for offences relating to documents given in evidence. 
195A. Procedure for witnesses in case of threatening, etc.  
196. Prosecution for offences against the State and for criminal conspiracy to commit such offence. 
197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants. 
198. Prosecution for offences against marriage. 
198A. Prosecution of offences under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code. 
198B. Cognizance of offence. 
199. Prosecution for defamation. 
CHAPTER XV 
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES 
200.  Examination of complainant. 
201.  Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of the case. 
202.  Postponement of issue of process. 
203.  Dismissal of complaint.  
CHAPTER XVI 
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES 
204. Issue of process. 
205. Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused. 
206. Special summons in cases of petty offence. 
207. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents. 
208. Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in other cases triable by Court of             
Session. 
209. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable exclusively by it. 
210. Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case and police investigation in respect of 
the same offence.   
CHAPTER XVII 
THE CHARGE 
A.–Form of charges 
211.  Contents of charge. 
212. Particulars as to time, place and person. 

9 
 
SECTIONS 
213.  When manner of committing offence must be stated. 
214.  Words in charge taken in sense of law under which offence is punishable. 
215.  Effect of errors. 
216.  Court may alter charge. 
217.  Recall of witnesses when charge altered. 
B.–Joinder of charges 
218.  Separate charges for distinct offences. 
219.  Three offences of same kind within year may be charged together. 
220.  Trial for more than one offence. 
221.  Where it is doubtful what offence has been committed. 
222.  When offence proved included in offence charged. 
223. What persons may be charged jointly. 
224.  Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of several charges. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION 
225.  Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor. 
226.  Opening case for prosecution. 
227.  Discharge. 
228.  Framing of charge. 
229.  Conviction on plea of guilty. 
230.  Date for prosecution evidence. 
231.  Evidence for prosecution. 
232.  Acquittal. 
233.  Entering upon defence. 
234.  Arguments. 
235.  Judgment of acquittal or conviction. 
236.  Previous conviction. 
237.  Procedure in cases instituted under section 199(2). 
CHAPTER XIX 
TRIAL OF WARRANT-CASES BY MAGISTRATES 
A.–Cases instituted on a police report 
238.  Compliance with section 207. 
239.  When accused shall be discharged. 
240.  Framing of charge. 
241.  Conviction on plea of guilty. 
242.  Evidence for prosecution. 
243.  Evidence for defence. 

10 
 
SECTIONS 
B.–Cases instituted otherwise than on police report                      
244. Evidence for prosecution. 
245. When accused shall be discharged. 
246. Procedure where accused is not discharged. 
247. Evidence for defence. 
C.–Conclusion of trial 
248.  Acquittal or conviction. 
249.  Absence of complainant. 
250.  Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause. 
CHAPTER XX 
TRIAL OF SUMMONS-CASES BY MAGISTRATES 
251.  Substance of accusation to be stated. 
252.  Conviction on plea of guilty. 
253.  Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty cases. 
254.  Procedure when not convicted. 
255.  Acquittal or conviction. 
256.  Non-appearance or death of complainant. 
257.  Withdrawal of complaint. 
258.  Power to stop proceedings in certain cases. 
259.  Power of Court to convert summons-cases into warrant-cases. 
CHAPTER XXI 
SUMMARY TRIALS 
260.  Power to try summarily. 
261.  Summary trial by Magistrate of the second class. 
262.  Procedure for summary trials. 
263.  Record in summary trials. 
264.  Judgment in cases tried summarily. 
265.  Language of record and judgment. 
CHAPTER XXIA 
PLEA BARGAINING 
265A. Application of the Chapter. 
265B. Application for plea bargaining. 
265C. Guidelines for mutually satisfactory disposition. 
265D. Report of the mutually satisfactory disposition to be submitted before the Court. 
265E. Disposal of the case. 
265F. Judgment of the Court. 
265G. Finality of the judgment. 
265H. Power of the Court in plea bargaining. 

11 
 
SECTIONS 
265-I. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set-off against the sentence of 
imprisonment. 
265J. Savings. 
265K. Statements of accused not to be used. 
265L. Non-application of the Chapter. 
CHAPTER XXII 
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS 
266.  Definitions. 
267.  Power to require attendance of prisoners. 
268.  Power of State Government to exclude certain persons from operation of section 267. 
269.  Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order in certain contingencies. 
270.  Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody. 
271.  Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison. 
CHAPTER XXIII 
EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 
A.–Mode of taking and recording evidence 
272.  Language of Courts. 
273.  Evidence to be taken in presence of accused. 
274.  Record in summons-cases and inquiries. 
275.  Record in warrant-cases. 
276.  Record in trial before Court of Session. 
277.  Language of record of evidence. 
278.  Procedure in regard to such evidence when completed. 
279.  Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader. 
280.  Remarks respecting demeanour of witness. 
281.  Record of examination of accused. 
282.  Interpreter to be bound to interpret truthfully. 
283.  Record in High Court. 
B.–Commissions for the examination of witnesses 
284.  When attendance of witness may be dispensed with and commission issued. 
285.  Commission to whom to be issued. 
286.  Execution of commissions. 
287.  Parties may examine witnesses. 
288.  Return of commission. 
289.  Adjournment of proceeding. 
290.  Execution of foreign commissions. 
291.  Deposition of medical witness. 
291A. Identification report of Magistrate. 

12 
 
SECTIONS 
292.  Evidence of officers of the Mint. 
293.  Reports of certain Government scientific experts. 
294.  No formal proof of certain documents. 
295.  Affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants. 
296.  Evidence of formal character on affidavit. 
297.  Authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn. 
298.  Previous conviction or acquittal how proved. 
299.  Record of evidence in absence of accused. 
CHAPTER XXIV  
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 
300.  Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same offence. 
301.  Appearance by Public Prosecutors. 
302.  Permission to conduct prosecution. 
303.  Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to be defended. 
304.  Legal aid to accused at State expense in certain cases. 
305.  Procedure when corporation or registered society is an accused. 
306.  Tender of pardon to accomplice. 
307.  Power to direct tender of pardon. 
308.  Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon. 
309.  Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings. 
310.  Local inspection. 
311.  Power to summon material witness, or examine person present. 
311A. Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatures or handwriting. 
312.  Expenses of complainants and witnesses. 
313.  Power to examine the accused. 
314.  Oral arguments and memorandum of arguments. 
315.  Accused person to be competent witness. 
316.  No influence to be used to induce disclosure. 
317.  Provision for inquiries and trial being held in the absence of accused in certain cases. 
318.  Procedure where accused does not understand proceedings. 
319.  Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence. 
320.  Compounding of offences. 
321.  Withdrawal from prosecution. 
322.  Procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of. 
323.  Procedure when, after commencement of inquiry or trial, Magistrate finds case should be     
committed. 
324.  Trial of persons previously convicted of offences against coinage, stamp-law or property. 
325.  Procedure when Magistrate cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe. 

13 
 
SECTIONS 
326.  Conviction or commitment on evidence partly recorded by one Magistrate and partly by 
another. 
327.  Court to be open. 
CHAPTER XXV 
PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND 
328.  Procedure in case of accused being lunatic. 
329.  Procedure in case of person of unsound mind tried before Court. 
330.  Release of person of unsound mind pending investigation or trial. 
331.  Resumption of inquiry or trial. 
332.  Procedure on accused appearing before Magistrate or Court. 
333.  When accused appears to have been of sound mind. 
334.  Judgment of acquittal on ground of unsoundness of mind. 
335.  Person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe custody. 
336.  Power of State Government to empower officer-in-charge to discharge. 
337.  Procedure where lunatic prisoner is reported capable of making his defence. 
338.  Procedure where lunatic detained is declared fit to be released. 
339.  Delivery of lunatic to care of relative or friend. 
CHAPTER XXVI 
PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 
340.  Procedure in cases mentioned in section 195. 
341.  Appeal. 
342.  Power to order costs. 
343.  Procedure of Magistrate taking cognizance. 
344.  Summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence. 
345.  Procedure in certain cases of contempt. 
346. Procedure where Court  considers that case should not be dealt with under section 345. 
347.  When Registrar or Sub-Registrar to be deemed a Civil Court. 
348.  Discharge of offender on submission of apology. 
349.  Imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or produce document. 
350.  Summary procedure for punishment for non-attendance by a witness in obedience to summons. 
351.  Appeals from convictions under sections 344, 345, 349 and 350. 
352.  Certain Judges and Magistrates not to try certain offences when committed before themselves. 
CHAPTER XXVII 
THE JUDGMENT 
353.  Judgment. 
354.  Language and contents of judgment. 
355.  Metropolitan Magistrate's judgment. 

14 
 
SECTIONS 
356.  Order for notifying address of previously convicted offender. 
357.  Order to pay compensation. 
357A. Victim compensation scheme. 
357B. Compensation to be in addition to fine under section 326A or section 376D of Indian Penal Code. 
357C. Treatment of victims. 
358.  Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested. 
359.  Order to pay costs in non-cognizable cases. 
360.  Order to release on probation of good conduct or after admonition. 
361.  Special reasons to be recorded in certain cases. 
362.  Court not to alter judgment. 
363.  Copy of judgment to be given to the accused and other persons. 
364.  Judgment when to be translated. 
365.  Court of Session to send copy of finding and sentence to District Magistrate. 
CHAPTER XXVIII 
SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION 
366.  Sentence of death to be submitted by Court of Session for confirmation. 
367.  Power to direct further inquiry to be made or additional evidence to be taken. 
368.  Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction. 
369.  Confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges. 
370.  Procedure in case of difference of opinion. 
371.  Procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation. 
CHAPTER XXIX 
APPEALS 
372.  No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided. 
373.  Appeal from orders requiring security or refusal to accept or rejecting surety for keeping peace 
or good behaviour. 
374.  Appeals from convictions. 
375.  No appeal in certain cases when accused pleads guilty. 
376.  No appeal in petty cases. 
377.  Appeal by the State Government against sentence. 
378.  Appeal in case of acquittal. 
379.  Appeal against conviction by High Court in certain cases. 
380.  Special right of appeal in certain cases. 
381.  Appeal to Court of Session how heard. 
382.  Petition of appeal. 
383.  Procedure when appellant in jail. 
384.  Summary dismissal of appeal. 
385.  Procedure for hearing appeals not dismissed summarily. 
386.  Powers of the Appellate Court. 
387.  Judgments of Subordinate Appellate Court. 
388.  Order of High Court on appeal to be certified to lower Court. 

15 
 
SECTIONS 
389.  Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of appellant on bail. 
390.  Arrest of accused in appeal from acquittal. 
391.  Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken. 
392.  Procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally divided. 
393.  Finality of judgments and orders on appeal. 
394.  Abatement of appeals. 
CHAPTER XXX 
REFERENCE AND REVISION 
395.  Reference to High Court. 
396.  Disposal of case according to decision of High Court. 
397.  Calling for records to exercise powers of revision. 
398.  Power to order inquiry. 
399.  Sessions Judge's powers of revision. 
400.  Power of Additional Sessions Judge. 
401.  High Court's powers of revision. 
402.  Power of High Court to withdraw or transfer revision cases. 
403.  Option of Court to hear parties. 
404.  Statement by Metropolitan Magistrate of ground of his decision to be considered by High Court. 
405.  High Court's order to be certified to lower Court. 
CHAPTER XXXI 
TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES 
406.  Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals. 
407.  Power of High Court to transfer cases and appeals. 
408.  Power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals. 
409.  Withdrawal of cases and appeals by Sessions Judges. 
410.  Withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrate. 
411.  Making over or withdrawal of cases by Executive Magistrates. 
412.  Reasons to be recorded. 
CHAPTER XXXII 
EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES 
A.–Death Sentences 
413.  Execution of order passed under section 368. 
414.  Execution of sentence of death passed by High Court. 
415.  Postponement of execution of sentence of death in case of appeal to Supreme Court. 
416.  Postponement of capital sentence on pregnant woman. 

16 
 
SECTIONS 
B.–Imprisonment 
417.  Power to appoint place of imprisonment. 
418.  Execution of sentence of imprisonment. 
419.  Direction of warrant for execution. 
420.  Warrant with whom to be lodged. 
C.–Levy of fine 
421.  Warrant for levy of fine. 
422.  Effect of such warrant. 
423.  Warrant for levy of fine issued by a Court in any territory to which this Code does not extend. 
424.  Suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment. 
D.–General provisions regarding execution 
425.  Who may issue warrant. 
426.  Sentence on escaped convict when to take effect. 
427.  Sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence. 
428.  Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of 
imprisonment. 
429.  Saving. 
430.  Return of warrant on execution of sentence. 
431.  Money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine. 
E.–Suspension, remission and commutation of sentences 
432.  Power to suspend or remit sentences. 
433.  Power to commute sentence. 
433A. Restriction on powers of remission or commutation in certain cases. 
434.  Concurrent power of Central Government in case of death sentences. 
435.  State Government to act after consultation with Central Government in certain cases. 
CHAPTER XXXIII 
PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS 
436.  In what cases bail to be taken. 
436A. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained. 
437.  When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence. 
437A. Bail to require accused to appear before next appellate Court.  
438.  Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest. 
439.  Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail. 
440.  Amount of bond and reduction thereof. 
441.  Bond of accused and sureties. 
441A. Declaration by sureties. 
442.  Discharge from custody. 

17 
 
SECTIONS 
443.  Power to order sufficient bail when that first taken is insufficient. 
444.  Discharge of sureties. 
445.  Deposit instead of recognizance. 
446.  Procedure when bond has been forfeited. 
446A. Cancellation of bond and bail bond. 
447.  Procedure in case of insolvency of death of surety or when a bond is forfeited. 
448.  Bond required from minor. 
449.  Appeal from orders under section 446. 
450.  Power to direct levy of amount due on certain recognizances. 
CHAPTER XXXIV 
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY 
451.  Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial in certain cases. 
452.  Order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial. 
453.  Payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused. 
454.  Appeal against orders under section 452 or section 453. 
455.  Destruction of libellous and other matter. 
456.  Power to restore possession of immovable property. 
457.  Procedure by police upon seizure of property. 
458.  Procedure where no claimant appears within six months. 
459.  Power to sell perishable property. 
CHAPTER XXXV 
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS 
460.  Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings. 
461.  Irregularities which vitiate proceedings. 
462.  Proceedings in wrong place. 
463.  Non-compliance with provisions of section 164 or section 281. 
464.  Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge. 
465.  Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error, omission or irregularity. 
466.  Defect or error not to make attachment unlawful. 

18 
 
CHAPTER XXXVI 
LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES 
SECTIONS 
467.  Definitions. 
468.  Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation. 
469.  Commencement of the period of limitation. 
470.  Exclusion of time in certain cases. 
471.  Exclusion of date on which Court is closed. 
472.  Continuing offence. 
473.  Extension of period of limitation in certain cases. 
CHAPTER XXXVII  
MISCELLANEOUS 
474.  Trials before High Courts. 
475.  Delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be tried by Court-martial. 
476.  Forms. 
477.  Power of High Court to make rules. 
478.  Power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrate in certain cases. 
479.  Case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested. 
480.  Practising pleader not to sit as Magistrate in certain Courts. 
481.  Public servant concerned in sale not to purchase or bid for property. 
482.  Saving of inherent power of High Court. 
483.  Duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence over Courts of Judicial Magistrates. 
484.  Repeal and savings. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.–CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.–FORMS. 
FORM NO. 1.—Summons to an accused person. 
FORM NO. 2.—Warrant of arrest. 
FORM NO. 3.—Bond and bail-bond after arrest under a warrant. 
FORM NO. 4.—Proclamation requiring the appearance of a person accused. 
FORM NO. 5.—Proclamation requiring the attendance of a witness. 
FORM NO. 6.—Order of attachment to compel the attendance of a witness. 
FORM NO. 7.—Order of attachment to compel the appearance of a person accused. 
FORM NO. 8.—Order authorising an attachment by the District Magistrate or Collector. 
FORM NO. 9.—Warrant in the first instance to bring up a witness. 
FORM NO. 10.—Warrant to search after information of a particular offence. 
FORM NO. 11.—Warrant to search suspected place of deposit. 

19 
 
FORM NO. 12.—Bond to keep the peace. 
FORM NO. 13.—Bond for good behaviour. 
FORM NO. 14.—Summons on information of a probable breach of the peace. 
FORM NO. 15.—Warrant of commitment on failure to find security to keep the peace. 
FORM NO. 16.—Warrant of commitment on failure to find security for good behaviour. 
FORM NO. 17.—Warrant to discharge a person imprisoned on failure to give security. 
FORM NO. 18.—Warrant of imprisonment on failure to pay maintenance. 
FORM NO. 19.—Warrant to enforce the payment of maintenance by attachment and sale. 
FORM NO. 20.—Order for the removal of nuisances. 
FORM NO. 21.—Magistrate’s notice and peremptory order. 
FORM NO. 22.—Injunction to provide against imminent danger pending inquiry. 
FORM NO. 23.—Magistrate’s order prohibiting the repetition, etc., of a nuisance. 
FORM NO. 24.—Magistrate’s order to prevent obstruction, riot, etc. 
FORM NO. 25.—Magistrate’s order declaring party entitled to retain possession of land, 
etc., in dispute. 
FORM NO. 26.—Warrant of attachment in the case of a dispute as to the possession of 
land, etc. 
FORM NO. 27.—Magistrate’s order prohibiting the doing of anything on land or water. 
FORM NO. 28.—Bond and bail-bond on a preliminary inquiry before a Police Officer. 
FORM NO. 29.—Bond to prosecute or give evidence. 
FORM NO. 30.—Special summons to a person accused of a petty offence. 
FORM NO. 31.—Notice of commitment by Magistrate to Public Prosecutor. 
FORM NO. 32.—Charges. 
I. Charges with one-head. 
II. Charges with two or more heads. 
III. Charges for theft after previous conviction. 
FORM NO. 33.—Summons to witness. 
FORM NO. 34.—Warrant of commitment on a sentence of imprisonment or fine if passed 
by a Court. 
FORM NO. 35.—Warrant of imprisonment on failure to pay compensation. 
FORM NO. 36.—Order requiring production in Court of person in prison for answering to 
charge of offence. 
FORM NO. 37.—Order requiring production in Court of person in prison for giving 
evidence. 
FORM NO. 38.—Warrant of commitment in certain cases of contempt when a fine is 
imposed. 
FORM NO. 39.—Magistrate’s or Judge’s warrant of commitment of witness refusing to 
answer or to produce document. 
FORM NO. 40.—Warrant of commitment under sentence of death. 
FORM NO. 41.—Warrant after a commutation of a sentence. 
FORM NO. 42.—Warrant of execution of a sentence of death. 

20 
 
FORM NO. 43.—Warrant to levy a fine by attachment and Sale. 
FORM NO. 44.—Warrant for recovery of fine. 
FORM NO. 44A.—Bond for appearance of offender released pending realisation of fine. 
FORM NO. 45.—Bond and bail-bond for attendance before officer in charge of police 
station or Court. 
FORM NO. 46.—Warrant to discharge a person imprisoned on failure to give security. 
FORM NO. 47.—Warrant of attachment to enforce a bond. 
FORM NO. 48.—Notice to surety on breach of a bond. 
FORM NO. 49.—Notice to surety of forfeiture of bond for good behaviour. 
FORM NO. 50.—Warrant of attachment against a surety. 
FORM NO. 51.—Warrant of commitment of the surety of an accused person admitted to 
bail. 
FORM NO. 52.—Notice to the principal of forfeiture of bond to keep the peace. 
FORM NO. 53.—Warrant to attach the property of the principal on breach of a bond to 
keep the peace. 
FORM NO. 54.—Warrant of imprisonment on breach of a bond to keep the peace. 
FORM NO. 55.—Warrant of attachment and sale on forfeiture of bond for good behaviour. 
FORM NO. 56.—Warrant of imprisonment on forfeiture of bond for good behaviour. 
APPENDIX I.—[Extracts from the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005 (25 of 
2005).]  
 

 
21 
 
THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE, 1973 
ACT NO. 2 OF 1974 
[25th January, 1974.] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to Criminal Procedure. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the twenty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India 1***: 
Provided that the provisions of this Code, other than those relating to Chapters VIII, X and XI 
thereof, shall not apply— 
(a) to the State of Nagaland, 
(b) to the tribal areas, 
but the concerned State Government may, by notification, apply such provisions or any of them to the 
whole or part of the State of Nagaland or such tribal areas, as the case may be, with such supplemental, 
incidental or consequential modifications, as may be specified in the notification. 
Explanation.—In this section, “tribal areas” means the territories which immediately before the 21st 
day of January, 1972, were included in the tribal areas of Assam, as referred to in paragraph 20 of the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, other than those within the local limits of the municipality of Shillong. 
(3) It shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1974. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Haryana 
In the Code of Criminal Procedure (Haryana Amendment) Act, 2014,-In section 1, after figures 
“2014”, the words “as extended to the Union territory of Chandigarh” shall be inserted; 
 
[Vide Notification No. GSR929(E) dated 16th December, 2019.] 
2. Definitions.—In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “bailable offence” means an offence which is shown as bailable in the First Schedule, or 
which is made bailable by any other law for the time being in force; and “non-bailable offence” 
means any other offence; 
(b) “charge” includes any head of charge when the charge contains more heads than one; 
(c) “cognizable offence” means an offence for which, and “cognizable case” means a case in 
which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under any other law for the time 
being in force, arrest without warrant; 
(d) “complaint” means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his 
taking action under this Code, that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an 
                                                 
1. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 34 of 2019, s. 95 and the Fifth Schedule (w.e.f. 31- 
10- 2019). 

22 
 
offence, but does not include a police report. 
Explanation.—A report made by a police officer in a case which discloses, after investigation, the 
commission of a non-cognizable offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police officer by 
whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant; 
(e) “High Court” means,— 
(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State; 
(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction of the High Court for a State has 
been extended by law, that High Court; 
(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest Court of criminal appeal for that  
territory other than the Supreme Court of India; 
(f) “India” means the territories to which this Code extends; 
(g) “inquiry” means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Code by a Magistrate 
or Court; 
(h) “investigation” includes all the proceedings under this Code for the collection of evidence 
conducted by a police officer or by any person (other than a Magistrate) who is authorised by a 
Magistrate in this behalf; 
(i) “judicial proceeding” includes any proceeding in the course of which evidence is or may be 
legally taken on oath; 
(j) “local jurisdiction”, in relation to a Court or Magistrate, means the local area within which the 
Court or Magistrate may exercise all or any of its or his powers under this Code 1[and such local area 
may comprise the whole of the State, or any part of the State, as the State Government may, by 
notification, specify]; 
(k) “metropolitan area” means the area declared, or deemed to be declared, under section 8, to be 
a metropolitan area; 
(l) “non-cognizable offence” means an offence for which, and “non-cognizable case” means a 
case in which, a police officer has no authority to arrest without warrant; 
(m) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(n) “offence” means any act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being in force 
and includes any act in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the Cattle-
trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871); 
(o) “officer in charge of a police station” includes, when the officer in charge of the police station 
is absent from the station-house or unable from illness or other cause to perform his duties, the police 
officer present at the station-house who is next in rank to such officer and is above the rank of 
constable or, when the State Government so directs, any other police officer so present; 
(p) “place” includes a house, building, tent, vehicle and vessel; 
(q) “pleader”, when used with reference to any proceeding in any Court, means a person 
authorised by or under any law for the time being in force, to practise in such Court, and includes any 
other person appointed with the permission of the Court to act in such proceeding; 
(r) “police report” means a report forwarded by a police officer to a Magistrate under                    
sub-section (2) of section 173; 
(s) “police station” means any post or place declared generally or specially by the State 
Government, to be a police station, and includes any local area specified by the State Government in 
this behalf; 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

23 
 
(t) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Code; 
(u) “Public Prosecutor” means any person appointed under section 24, and includes any person 
acting under the directions of a Public Prosecutor; 
(v) “sub-division” means a sub-division of a district; 
(w) “summons-case” means a case relating to an offence, and not being a warrant-case; 
1[(wa) “victim” means a person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by reason of the act or 
omission for which the accused  person has been charged  and the expression “victim” includes his or 
her guardian or legal heir;] 
(x) “warrant-case” means a case relating to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for 
life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years; 
(y) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Indian Penal Code                 
(45 of 1860) have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Haryana  
In section 2, for the words “State of Haryana”, the words “Union territory of Chandigarh” shall be 
substituted. 
[Vide Notification No. GSR929(E) dated 16th December, 2019.] 
3. Construction of references.—(1) In this Code,— 
(a) any reference, without any qualifying words, to a Magistrate, shall be construed, unless the 
context otherwise requires,— 
(i) in relation to an area outside a metropolitan area, as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate; 
(ii) in relation to a metropolitan area, as a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate;  
 
(b) any reference to a Magistrate of the second class shall, in relation to an area outside a 
metropolitan area, be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the second class, and, in 
relation to a metropolitan area, as a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate; 
(c)  any reference to a Magistrate of the first class shall,— 
(i) in relation to a metropolitan area, be construed as a reference to a Metropolitan Magistrate 
exercising jurisdiction in that area; 
(ii) in relation to any other area, be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class exercising jurisdiction in that area; 
(d) any reference to the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall, in relation to a metropolitan area, be 
construed as a reference to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in that area. 
(2) In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, any reference to the Court of a Judicial 
Magistrate shall, in relation to a metropolitan area, be construed as a reference to the Court of the 
Metropolitan Magistrate for that area. 
(3) Unless the context otherwise requires, any reference in any enactment passed before the 
commencement of this Code,— 
(a) to a Magistrate of the first class, shall be construed as a reference to a Judicial Magistrate of 
the first class; 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

24 
 
(b) to a Magistrate of the second class or of the third class, shall be construed as a reference to a 
Judicial Magistrate of the second class; 
(c) to a Presidency Magistrate or Chief Presidency Magistrate, shall be construed as a reference, 
respectively, to a Metropolitan Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate; 
(d) to any area which is included in a Metropolitan area, as a reference to such metropolitan area, 
and any reference to a Magistrate of the first class or of the second class in relation to such area, shall 
be construed as a reference to the Metropolitan Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in such area. 
(4) Where, under any law, other than this Code, the function exercisable by a Magistrate relate to 
matters,— 
(a) which involve the appreciation or sifting of evidence or the formulation of any decision which 
exposes any person to any punishment or penalty or detention in custody pending investigation, 
inquiry or trial or would have the effect of sending him for trial before any Court, they shall, subject 
to the provisions of this Code, be exercisable by a Judicial Magistrate; or 
(b) which are administrative or executive in nature, such as, the granting of a licence, the 
suspension or cancellation of a licence, sanctioning a prosecution or withdrawing from a prosecution, 
they shall, subject as aforesaid, be exercisable by an Executive Magistrate.  
STATE AMENDMENT 
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep  
Insertion of New section 3A. —In the Code, as it applies to the Union territory of Andaman and 
Nicobar Islands, after section 3, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—  
“3A. Special provision relating to Andaman and Nicobar Islands. —(1) Reference in this Code to— 
(a) The Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be construed as references to the District  Magistrate or, where 
the State Government so directs, also to the Additional District Magistrate; 
(b) a  Magistrate or  Magistrate of the first class or of the second class or Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class or of the second class, shall be construed as references to such Executive Magistrate as the State 
Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
(2) The State Government may, if it is of opinion that adequate number of persons are available for 
appointment as Judicial Magistrate, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the provisions of this 
section shall, on and from such day as may be specified in the notification, cease to be in force and different 
dates may be specified for different islands. 
(3) On the cesser of operation of the provisions of this section, every inquiry or trial pending, immediately 
before such cesser, before the District  Magistrate or Additional District  Magistrate or any Executive 
Magistrate, as the case may be, shall stand transferred, and shall be dealt with, from the stage which was reached 
before, such cesser, by such Judicial Magistrate as the State Government may specify in this behalf.”. 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 3.] 
4. Trial of offences under the Indian Penal Code and other laws.—(1) All offences under the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with 
according to the provisions hereinafter contained. 
(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt 
with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating 
the manner of place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences. 
5. Saving.—Nothing contained in this Code shall, in the absence of a specific provision to the 
contrary, affect any special or local law for the time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or power 
conferred, or any special form of procedure prescribed, by any other law for the time being in force. 

25 
 
CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL COURTS AND OFFICES 
6. Classes of Criminal Courts.—Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law, 
other than this Code, there shall be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts, namely:— 
(i) Courts of Session; 
(ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class and, in any metropolitan area, Metropolitan Magistrates; 
(iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class; and 
(iv) Executive Magistrates. 
7. Territorial divisions.—(1) Every State shall be a sessions division or shall consist of sessions 
divisions; and every sessions divisions shall, for the purposes of this Code, be a district or consist of 
districts: 
Provided that every metropolitan area shall, for the said purposes, be a separate sessions division and 
district. 
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, alter the limits or the number 
of such divisions and districts. 
(3) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, divide any district into sub-
divisions and may alter the limits or the number of such sub-divisions. 
(4) The sessions divisions, districts and sub-divisions existing in a State at the commencement of this 
Code, shall be deemed to have been formed under this section. 
8. Metropolitan areas.—(1) The State Government may, by notification, declare that, as from such 
date as may be specified in the notification, any area in the State comprising a city or town whose 
population exceeds one million shall be a metropolitan area for the purposes of this Code. 
(2) As from the commencement of this Code, each of the Presidency-towns of Bombay, Calcutta and 
Madras and the city of Ahmedabad shall be deemed to be declared under sub-section (1) to be a 
metropolitan area. 
(3) The State Government may, by notification, extend, reduce or alter the limits of a metropolitan 
area but the reduction  or alteration shall not be so made as to reduce the population of such area to less 
than one million. 
(4) Where, after an area has been declared, or deemed to have been declared to be, a metropolitan 
area, the population of such area falls below one million, such area shall, on and from such date as the 
State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, cease to be a metropolitan area; but 
notwithstanding such cesser, any inquiry, trial or appeal pending immediately before such cesser before 
any Court or Magistrate in such area shall continue to be dealt with under this Code, as if such cesser had 
not taken place. 
(5) Where the State Government reduces or alters, under sub-section (3), the limits of any 
metropolitan area, such  reduction  or  alteration  shall  not  affect  any inquiry,  trial  or  appeal  pending 
immediately  before such reduction or alteration before any Court or Magistrate, and every such inquiry, 
trial or appeal shall continue to be dealt with under this Code as if such reduction or alteration had not 
taken place. 
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “population” means the population as 
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published. 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Delhi 
 
In its application to the National Capital Territory of Delhi, in section 8,— 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “a city or town”, substitute “a city or town or part thereof”; 

26 
 
(b) for sub-section (3), substitute the following sub-section, namely:— 
“(3) The State Government may, by notification divide a metropolitan area into two or more such 
areas or extend or reduce or alter the limits of a metropolitan area: 
Provided that— 
(a) the division of metropolitan area shall not be so made as to result in the population of any of the 
areas into which it has been divided being less than one million; and 
(b) the reduction or alteration of metropolitan area shall not be so made as to reduce the population 
of such area to less than one million.”; 
(c) after sub-section (4), insert the following sub-section, namely: — 
“(4-A) Where any metropolitan area is divided under sub-section (3), the High Court may issue such 
directions as it deems fit with respect to the disposal of the proceedings pendings immediately before such 
division before any Magistrate or court having jurisdiction in respect of such area.” 
[Vide Delhi Act 9 of 2011, s. 2.] 
9. Court of Session.—(1) The State Government shall establish a Court of Session for every sessions 
division. 
(2) Every Court of Session shall be presided over by a Judge, to be appointed by the High Court. 
(3) The High Court may also appoint Additional Sessions Judges and Assistant Session Judges to 
exercise jurisdiction in a Court of Session. 
(4) The Sessions Judge of one sessions division may be appointed by the High Court to be also an 
Additional Sessions Judge of another division, and in such case he may sit for the disposal of cases at 
such place or places in the other division as the High Court may direct. 
(5) Where the office of the Sessions Judge is vacant, the High Court may make arrangements for the 
disposal of any urgent application which is, or may be, made or pending before such Court of Session by 
an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, or, if there be no Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, by a 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, in the sessions division; and every such Judge or Magistrate shall have 
jurisdiction to deal with any such application. 
(6) The Court of Session shall ordinarily hold its sitting at such place or places as the High Court 
may, by notification, specify; but, if, in any particular case, the Court of Session is of opinion that it will 
tend to the general convenience of the parties and witnesses to hold its sittings at any other place in the 
sessions division, it may, with the consent of the prosecution and the accused, sit at that place for the 
disposal of the case or the examination of any witness or witnesses therein. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Code, “appointment” does not include the first appointment, 
posting or promotion of a person by the Government to any Service, or post in connection with the affairs of 
the Union or of a State, where under any law, such appointment, posting or promotion is required to be 
made by Government. 

27 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
West Bengal.— 
To sub-section (3) of section 9 of the principal Act, the following provisos shall be added:— 
Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, an Additional Sessions 
Judge in a sub-division, other than the sub-division, by whatever name called, wherein the headquarters of 
the Sessions Judges are situated, exercising jurisdiction in a Court of Session, shall have all the powers of 
the Sessions Judge under this Code, in respect of the cases and proceedings in the Criminal Courts in that 
sub-division, for the purposes of sub-section (7) of session 116, sections 193 and 194, clause (a) of 
section 209 and sections 409, 439 and 449: 
Provided further that the above powers shall not be in derogation of the powers otherwise exercisable 
by an Additional Sessions Judge or a Sessions Judge under this Code.”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act, 24 of 1988, s. 3.] 
Orissa 
Amendment of section 9.-In Section 9 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), to sub-section (3), the following provisions shall be added, 
namely:— 
       “Provided that  notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code, an Additional 
Sessions Judge in a district or subdivision, other than the district or subdivision, by whatever name called, 
wherein  the headquarters of the Sessions Judge are situated, exercising jurisdiction in a Court of Sessions 
shall have all the powers of the Sessions Judge under this  Code, in respect of the cases and the 
proceedings in the Criminal Courts in that district or subdivision for the purposes of sub-section (7) of 
section 116, sections 193 and 194, clause (a) of section 209 and sections 409 and 449: 
 
Provided further that the above powers shall be not be in derogation of the powers otherwise 
exercisable by an Additional Sessions Judge or  a Sessions Judge under this Code.” 
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 2004, s. 2] 
10. Subordination of Assistant Sessions Judges.—(1) All Assistant Sessions Judges shall be 
subordinate to the Sessions Judge in whose Court they exercise jurisdiction. 
(2) The Sessions Judge may, from time to time, make rules consistent with this Code, as to the 
distribution of business among such Assistant Sessions Judges. 
(3) The Sessions Judge may also make provision for the disposal of any urgent application, in the 
event of his absence or inability to act, by an Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, or, if there be no 
Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge, by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and every such Judge or 
Magistrate shall be deemed to have jurisdiction to deal with any such application. 
11. Courts of Judicial Magistrates.—(1) In every district (not being a metropolitan area) there shall 
be established as many Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class and of the second class, and at such 
places, as the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify: 
1[Provided that the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, establish, for any 
local area, one or more Special Courts of Judicial Magistrates of the first class or of the second class to try 
any particular case or particular class of cases, and where any such Special Court is established, no other 
Court of Magistrate in the local area shall have jurisdiction to try any case or class of cases for the trial of 
which such Special Court of Judicial Magistrate has been established.] 
(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court. 
(3) The High Court may, whenever it appears to it to be expedient or necessary, confer the powers of  
                                                 
1. Added by Act 45 of 1978, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

28 
 
a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or of the second class on any member of the Judicial Service of the 
State, functioning as a Judge in a Civil Court. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep 
In the Code, as it applies to the Union Territories to which this regulation extends, in sub-section (3) of 
section 11, for the words “any member of the judicial service of the state functioning as a judge in a civil 
court”, the words “any person discharging the functions of a civil court”, shall be substituted. 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 4.] 
12. Chief Judicial Magistrate and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, etc.—(1) In every 
district (not being a metropolitan area), the High Court shall appoint a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
to be the Chief Judicial Magistrate. 
(2) The High Court may appoint any Judicial Magistrate of the first class to be an Additional Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have all or any of the powers of a Chief Judicial Magistrate 
under this Code or under any other law for the time being in force as the High Court may direct. 
(3) (a) The High Court may designate any Judicial Magistrate of the first class in any sub-division as 
the Sub-divisional Judicial Magistrate and relieve him of the responsibilities specified in this section as 
occasion requires. 
(b) Subject to the general control of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, every Sub-divisional Judicial 
Magistrate shall also have and exercise, such powers of supervision and control over the work of the 
Judicial Magistrates (other than Additional Chief Judicial Magistrates) in the sub-division as the High 
Court may, by general or special order, specify in this behalf. 
13. Special Judicial Magistrates.—(1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State 
Government so to do, confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all 
or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Code on a Judicial Magistrate 1[of the first 
class or of the second class, in respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases, in any local 
area, not being a metropolitan area:] 
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses such qualification or 
experience in relation to legal affairs as the High Court may, by rules, specify. 
(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Judicial Magistrates and shall be appointed for such term, 
not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special order, direct. 
2[(3) The High Court may empower a Special Judicial Magistrate to exercise the powers of a 
Metropolitan Magistrate in relation to any metropolitan area outside his local jurisdiction.] 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Assam 
For section 13 of the Code, the following shall be substituted, namely:— 
“13. (1) The State Government may appoint as may persons as it thinks fit to be sub divisional 
Magistrates in any district in the State of Assam.  
(2) The State Government, or subject to the control of the State Government, the District Magistrate 
may place one or more Sub divisional Magistrates in charge of a subdivision”. 
[Vide Assam Act 13 of 1964, s. 2.] 
                                                 
1.  Subs. Act 45 of 1978, s. 4, for certain words (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
2.  Ins. by  s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

29 
 
Himachal Pradesh 
Amendment of Section 13.— in Sub-section (1) of section 13 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974) in its application to the State of Himachal Pradesh for the words “in any district” the 
words “in any local area” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 40 of 1976, s. 2.] 
14. Local jurisdiction of Judicial Magistrates.—(1) Subject to the control of the High Court, the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within which the 
Magistrates appointed under section 11 or under section 13 may exercise all or any of the powers with 
which they may respectively be invested under this Code: 
1[Provided that the Court of Special Judicial Magistrate may hold its sitting at any place within the 
local area for which it is established.] 
(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of every such 
Magistrate shall extend throughout the district. 
2[(3) Where the local jurisdiction of a Magistrate, appointed under section 11 or section 13 or                 
section 18, extends to an area beyond the district, or the metropolitan area, as the case may be, in which 
he ordinarily holds Court, any reference in this Code to the Court of Session, Chief Judicial Magistrate or 
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall, in relation to such Magistrate, throughout the area within his 
local jurisdiction, be construed, unless the context otherwise requires, as a reference to the Court of 
Session, Chief Judicial Magistrate, or Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, exercising 
jurisdiction in relation to the said district or metropolitan area.] 
15. Subordination of Judicial Magistrates.—(1) Every Chief Judicial Magistrate shall be 
subordinate to the Sessions Judge; and every other Judicial Magistrate shall, subject to the general control 
of the Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the Chief Judicial Magistrate. 
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders, consistent 
with this Code, as to the distribution of business among the Judicial Magistrates subordinate to him. 
16. Courts of Metropolitan Magistrates.—(1) In every metropolitan area, there shall be established 
as many Courts of Metropolitan Magistrates, and at such places, as the State Government may, after 
consultation with the High Court, by notification, specify. 
(2) The presiding officers of such Courts shall be appointed by the High Court.  
(3) The jurisdiction and powers of every Metropolitan Magistrate shall extend throughout the 
metropolitan area. 
17. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate.—(1) The High 
Court shall, in relation to every metropolitan area within its local jurisdiction, appoint a Metropolitan 
Magistrate to be the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for such metropolitan area. 
(2) The High Court may appoint any Metropolitan Magistrate to be an Additional Chief Metropolitan 
Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have all or any of the powers of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate 
under this Code or under any other law for the time being in force as the High Court may direct. 
18. Special Metropolitan Magistrates.—(1) The High Court may, if requested by the Central or State 
Government so to do, confer upon any person who holds or has held any post under the Government, all 
or any of the powers conferred or conferrable by or under this Code on a Metropolitan Magistrate, in 
respect to particular cases or to particular classes of cases 3*** , in any metropolitan area within its local 
jurisdiction: 
Provided that no such power shall be conferred on a person unless he possesses such qualification or 
experience in relation to legal affairs as the High Court may, by rules, specify. 
(2) Such Magistrates shall be called Special Metropolitan Magistrates and shall be appointed for such 
term, not exceeding one year at a time, as the High Court may, by general or special order, direct. 
4[(3) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may empower any Special Metropolitan 
                                                 
1.  Added by Act 45 of 1978,  s. 5, (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
2.  Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
3. The words “or to cases generally” omitted by s. 6, ibid., (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 6, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

30 
 
Magistrate to exercise, in any local area outside the metropolitan area, the powers of a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class.] 
19. Subordination of Metropolitan Magistrates.—(1) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and every 
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall be subordinate to the Sessions Judge; and every other 
Metropolitan Magistrate shall, subject to the general control of the Sessions Judge, be subordinate to the 
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate. 
(2) The High Court may, for the purposes of this Code, define the extent of the subordination, if any, 
of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrates to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate. 
(3) The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders, 
consistent with this Code, as to the distribution of business among the Metropolitan Magistrates and as to 
the allocation of business to an Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate. 
20. Executive Magistrates.—(1) In every district and in every metropolitan area, the State 
Government may appoint as many persons as it thinks fit to be Executive Magistrates and shall appoint 
one of them to be the District Magistrate. 
(2) The State Government may appoint any Executive Magistrate to be an Additional District 
Magistrate, and such Magistrate shall have 1[such] of the powers of a District Magistrate under this Code 
or under any other law for the time being in force 2[as may be directed by the State Government]. 
 (3) Whenever, in consequence of the office of a District Magistrate becoming vacant, any officer 
succeeds temporarily to the executive administration of the district, such officer shall, pending the orders 
of the State Government, exercise all the powers and perform all the duties respectively conferred and 
imposed by this Code on the District Magistrate. 
(4) The State Government may place an Executive Magistrate in charge of a sub-division and may 
relieve him of the charge as occasion requires; and the Magistrate so placed in charge of a sub-division 
shall be called the Sub-divisional Magistrate.  
3[(4A) The State Government may, by general or special order and subject to such control and 
directions as it may deem fit to impose, delegate its powers under sub-section (4) to the District 
Magistrate.] 
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude the State Government from conferring, under any law for 
the time being in force, on a Commissioner of Police, all or any of the powers of an Executive Magistrate 
in relation to a metropolitan area. 
21. Special Executive Magistrates.—The State Government may appoint, for such term as it may 
think fit, Executive Magistrates, to be known as Special Executive Magistrates, for particular areas or for 
the performance of particular functions and confer on such Special Executive Magistrates such of the 
powers as are conferrable under this Code on Executive Magistrates, as it may deem fit. 
22. Local Jurisdiction of Executive Magistrates.—(1) Subject to the control of the State 
Government, the District Magistrate may, from time to time, define the local limits of the areas within 
which the Executive Magistrates may exercise all or any of the powers with which they may be invested 
under this Code. 
(2) Except as otherwise provided by such definition, the jurisdiction and powers of every such 
Magistrate shall extend throughout the district. 
23. Subordination of Executive Magistrates.—(1) All Executive Magistrates, other than the 
Additional District Magistrate, shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate, and every Executive 
Magistrate (other than the Sub-divisional Magistrate) exercising powers in a sub-division shall also be 
subordinate to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, subject, however, to the general control of the District 
Magistrate. 
(2) The District Magistrate may, from time to time, make rules or give special orders, consistent with 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978,  s. 7, for “all or any” (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid, (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

31 
 
this Code, as to the distribution of business among the Executive Magistrates subordinate to him and as to 
the allocation of business to an Additional District Magistrate. 
1[24. Public Prosecutors.—(1) For every High Court, the Central Government or the State 
Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also 
appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecutors, for conducting in such Court, any prosecution, appeal 
or other proceeding on behalf of the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Public Prosecutors for the purpose of 
conducting any case or class of cases in any district or local area. 
(3) For every district, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint 
one or more Additional Public Prosecutors for the district: 
Provided that the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor appointed for one district may be 
appointed also to be a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, for another 
district. 
(4) The District Magistrate shall, in consultation with the Sessions Judge, prepare a panel of names of 
persons, who are, in his opinion fit to be appointed as Public Prosecutors or Additional Public Prosecutors 
for the district. 
(5) No person shall be appointed by the State Government as the Public Prosecutor or Additional 
Public Prosecutor for the district unless his name appears in the panel of names prepared by the District 
Magistrate under sub-section (4). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where in a State there exists a regular 
Cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor or an Additional 
Public Prosecutor only from among the persons constituting such Cadre: 
Provided that where, in the opinion of the State Government, no suitable person is available in such 
Cadre for such appointment that Government may appoint a person as Public Prosecutor or Additional 
Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of names prepared by the District Magistrate under 
sub-section (4). 
2[Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,— 
(a) “regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers” means a Cadre of Prosecuting Officers which 
includes therein the post of a Public Prosecutor, by whatever name called, and which provides for 
promotion of Assistant Public Prosecutors, by whatever name called, to that post; 
(b) “Prosecuting Officer” means a person, by whatever name called, appointed to perform the 
functions of a Public  Prosecutor, an Additional  Public Prosecutor  or an Assistant Public Prosecutor 
under this Code.] 
(7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public 
Prosecutor under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (6), only if he has 
been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years. 
(8) The Central Government or the State Government may appoint, for the purposes of any case or 
class of cases, a person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years as a Special 
Public Prosecutor: 
3[Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his choice to assist the 
prosecution under this sub-section.] 
(9) For the purposes of sub-section (7) and sub-section (8), the period during which a person has been 
in practice as a pleader, or has rendered (whether before or after the commencement of this Code) service 
as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor or other 
Prosecuting Officer, by whatever name called, shall be deemed to be the period during which such person 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 8, for section 24 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 3 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

32 
 
has been in practice as an advocate.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Karnataka 
Amendment of section  24.- In section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 
1974) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) in sub-section (1),— 
(i) the words and punctuation mark “or the State Government shall”, shall be omitted; and 
(ii) for the words “appoint a Public Prosecutor” the words “or the State Government shall appoint a 
Public Prosecutor” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 20 of 1982, s. 2.] 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 24.-  In Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) in its 
application to the State of Maharashtra:— 
(a) in sub-section (6), the proviso shall be deleted; 
(b) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
“(6-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6), the State Government may, subject to 
the provisions of sub-sections (4) and (5), appoint a person who has been in practice as an advocate for 
not less than seven years, as the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district.”. 
 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 33 of 2014, s. 2.] 
 
Madhya Pradesh  
 
Amendment of Section 24.—In Section 24 of the principal Act.— 
 
(i) in sub-section (6), for the words, “brackets and figure “Notwithstanding anything contained in               
sub-section (5)”, the words, brackets, letter and figures “Notwithstanding anything contained in                   
sub-section (5), but subject to the provisions of sub-section (6-A)” shall be substituted and shall be 
deemed to have been substituted with effect from 18th December, 1978; 
 
(ii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been 
inserted with effect from 18th December, 1978, namely:— 
 
“(6-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6), the State Government may appoint a 
person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years as the Public Prosecutor 
or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district and it shall not be necessary to appoint the Public 
Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district from among the person constituting the 
Cadre of Prosecuting Officers in the State of Madhya Pradesh and the provisions of sub-sections (4) 
and (5) shall apply to the appointment of a Public Prosecutor Additional Public Prosecutor under this 
sub-section”; 
 
(iii) in sub-section (7), after the words, bracket and figure “sub-section (6)”, the words, brackets, 
figure and letter “or sub-section (6-A)” shall be inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with 
effect from 18th December, 1978; and 
 
(iv) in sub-section (9), for the words, brackets and figure, “sub-section (7)”, the words, brackets, 
figures and letter “sub-section (6-A) and sub-section (7)” shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have 
been substituted with effect from 18th December, 1978. 

33 
 
 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 21 of 1995, s. 3.] 
 
West Bengal 
 
In Sub-section (6) of section 24 of the principal Act, for the words “shall appoint a Public Prosecutor 
or an Additional Public Prosecutor only”, the words “may also appoint a Public Prosecutor or an 
Additional Public Prosecutor” shall be substituted. 
 
[Vide West Bengal Act 26 of 1990, s. 3.]  
West Bengal  
In sub-section (6) of section 24 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 25 of 1992, s. 3.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).— 
Section 24.— After sub-section (6), insert the following sub-section, namely:— 
“(6A).–Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) and sub-section (6), the 
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir may appoint a person who has been in 
practice as an Advocate for not less than seven years as Public Prosecutor or Additional Public 
Prosecutor for High Court and for the District Courts and it shall not be necessary to appoint Public 
Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the High Court in consultation with High Court and 
Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the District Court from amongst the person 
constituting the cadre of Prosecution for the State of Jammu and Kashmir.” 
[vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020).] 
25. Assistant Public prosecutors.—(1) The State Government shall appoint in every district one or 
more Assistant  Public Prosecutors for conducting prosecutions in the Courts of Magistrates. 
1[(1A) The Central Government may appoint one or more Assistant Public Prosecutors for the 
purpose of conducting any case or class of cases in the Courts of Magistrates.] 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (3), no police officer shall be eligible to be appointed as 
an Assistant Public Prosecutor. 
(3) Where no Assistant Public Prosecutor is available for the purposes of any particular case, the 
District Magistrate may appoint any other person to be the Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of that 
case: 
Provided that a police officer shall not be so appointed— 
(a) if he has taken any part in the investigation into the offence with respect to which the accused is 
being prosecuted; or 
(b) if he is below the rank of Inspector. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s.  9 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

34 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Orissa 
Amendment of section 25.—In section 25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) 
(hereinafter referred to  as the said Code), to sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed, to prohibit the State Government from 
exercising its control over Assistant Public Prosecutors through police officers.” 
[Vide Orissa Act  6 of 1995, s. 2] 
1[25A. Directorate of Prosecution.—(1) The State Government may establish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as many Deputy Directors of Prosecution as it 
thinks fit. 
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Director of Prosecution or a Deputy Director of 
Prosecution, only if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years and such 
appointment shall be made with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court. 
(3) The Head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of Prosecution, who shall 
function under the administrative control of the Head of the Home Department in the State. 
(4) Every Deputy Director of Prosecution shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.  
(5) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointed 
by the State Government under sub-section (1), or as the case may be, sub-section (8), of section 24 to 
conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution.  
(6) Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor appointed 
by the State Government under sub-section (3), or as the case may be, sub-section (8), of section 24 to 
conduct cases in District Courts and every Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under sub-section (1) of 
section 25 shall be subordinate to the Deputy Director of Prosecution. 
(7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution and the Deputy Directors of Prosecution 
and the areas for which each of the Deputy Directors of Prosecution have been appointed shall be such as 
the State Government may, by notification, specify. 
(8) The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Advocate General for the State while 
performing the functions of a Public Prosecutor.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Karnataka 
In section 25A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act No. 2 of 1974), — 
(a) for sub-section (2), the following shall be substituted, namely:—“(2) The post of Director of 
prosecution and Government litigations, or a Deputy Director of Prosecution and other cadres shall be filled in 
accordance with the Cadre and Recruitment Rules framed under the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 
(Karnataka Act 14 of 1990).” 
(b) for sub-section (5), the following shall be substituted, namely:—“(5) Every Public Prosecutor, 
Additional Public Prosecutor appointed by the State Government from the cadre of  Prosecutors recruited 
under the recruitment rules framed by the Government under the Karnataka State Civil Services Act, 1978 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s.  4 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  

35 
 
shall be subordinate to the Director of Prosecution and Government litigations and every Public Prosecutor, 
Additional Prosecutor and Special Prosecutor appointed under sub-section (8) of section 24 shall be 
subordinate to the Advocate General.” 
(c) in sub-section (6), for the words “Deputy Director of Prosecution,  the words “Director of Prosecution” 
shall be substituted. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 39 of 2012,  s. 2] 
Madhya Pradesh 
Substitution of Section 25A.—For section 25A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely: — 
“25A. Directorate of Prosecution.—(1) The State Government may establish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Director of Prosecution and as many Additional Directors of Prosecution, 
Joint Directors of Prosecution, Deputy Directors of Prosecution and Assistant Directors of Prosecution 
and such other posts as it thinks fit. 
(2) The post of Director of Prosecution, Additional Directors of Prosecution, Joint Directors of 
Prosecution, Deputy Directors of Prosecution and Assistant Directors of Prosecution and other post shall 
be filled in accordance with the Madhya Pradesh Public Prosecution (Gazetted) Service Recruitment 
Rules, 1991, as amended from time to time. 
(3) The head of the Directorate of Prosecution shall be the Director of Prosecution, who shall function 
under the administrative control of the head of the Home Department in the State. 
(4) Every Additional Director of Prosecution, Joint Director of Prosecution, Deputy Director of 
Prosecution and Assistant Director of Prosecution and other posts specified in sub-section (2) shall be 
subordinate to the Director of Prosecution. 
(5) Every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor appointed under the Madhya Pradesh 
Public Prosecution (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1991, shall be subordinate to the Director of 
Prosecution and every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor appointed under                  
sub-section (1) of Section 24 and every Special Public Prosecutor appointed under sub-section (8) of 
Section 24 to conduct cases in the High Court shall be subordinate to the Advocate General. 
(6) Every Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor appointed under sub-section (3) of 
Section 24 and every Special Public Prosecutor appointed under sub-section (8) of Section 24 to conduct 
cases in District Courts shall be subordinate to the District Magistrate. 
(7) The powers and functions of the Director of Prosecution shall be such as the State Government 
may, by notification, specify.”. 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 18 of 2014, s. 3.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).— 
Section 25A.-(i) for sub-sections (1) and (2), substitute– 
(1) The Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall establish a Directorate of 
Prosecution consisting of a Director General of Prosecution and such other officers, as may be 
provided in rules to be framed by the said Government; and 
(2) The Post of Director General of Prosecution and all other officers, constituting the prosecution 
cadre, shall be filled in accordance with the rules to be framed by the said Government. 
(ii) in sub-section (3), substitute “Director of Prosecution” with “Director General of 
Prosecution”; 

36 
 
(iii) for sub-section (4), substitute “(4) subject to the control of the Director General of 
Prosecution, the Deputy Director shall be subordinate to and under the Control of a Joint Director.” 
(iv) substitute sub-section (5),– 
“Every Public Prosecutor, Additional Public Prosecutor and Special Public Prosecutor 
appointed by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir under subsection 
(1), or the case may be under sub-section (8) of section 24 to conduct cases in the High Court 
shall be subordinate to the Advocate General.”; 
(v) for sub-section (7), substitute–  
“(7) The powers and functions of the Director General of Prosecution and other officers of the 
prosecution cadre shall be such as may be provided by the rules”. 
[vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020).] 
CHAPTER III 
POWER OF COURTS 
26. Courts by which offences are triable.—Subject to the other provisions of this Code,— 
(a) any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be tried by 
(i) the High Court, or 
(ii) the Court of Session, or 
(iii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be  triable: 
1[Provided that any 2[offence under section 376, 3[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, 
section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, 376DB] or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860)] shall be tried as far as practicable by a Court presided over by a woman.]  
(b) any offence under any other law shall, when any Court is mentioned in  this behalf in such 
law, be tried by  such Court and when no Court is so mentioned, may be tried by— 
(i) the High Court, or 
(ii) any other Court by which such offence is shown in the First Schedule to be triable. 
27. Jurisdiction in the case of juveniles.—Any offence not punishable with death or imprisonment 
for life, committed by any person who at the date when he appears or is brought before the Court is under 
the age of sixteen years, may be tried by the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, or by any Court 
specially empowered under the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960), or any other law for the time being in 
force providing for the treatment, training and rehabilitation of youthful offenders. 
28. Sentences which High Courts and Sessions Judges may pass.—(1) A High Court may pass any 
sentence authorised by law. 
(2) A Sessions Judge or Additional Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised by law; but any 
sentence of death passed by any such Judge shall be subject to confirmation by the High Court. 
(3) An Assistant Sessions Judge may pass any sentence authorised by law except a sentence of death 
or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding ten years. 
29. Sentences which Magistrates may  pass.—(1) The Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate may pass 
any sentence authorised by law except a sentence of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment 
for a term exceeding seven years. 
 (2) The Court of a Magistrate of the first class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 11, for “offence under section 376 and sections 376A to 376D of the Indian Penal                         
Code (45 of 1860)” (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2019, s. 10, for “section 376A,  section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 

37 
 
exceeding three years, or of fine not exceeding 1[ten thousand rupees], or of both. 
(3) The Court of Magistrate of the second class may pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding one year, or of fine not exceeding 2[five thousand rupees], or of both. 
(4) The Court of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate shall have the powers of the Court of a Chief 
Judicial Magistrate and that of a Metropolitan Magistrate, the powers of the Court of a Magistrate of the 
first class. 
30. Sentence of imprisonment in default of fine.—(1) The Court of a Magistrate may award such 
term of imprisonment in default of payment of fine as is authorised by law: 
Provided that the term— 
(a) is not in excess of the powers of the Magistrate under section 29; 
(b) shall not, where imprisonment has been awarded as part of the substantive sentence, exceed 
one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which the Magistrate is competent to inflict as punishment for 
the offence otherwise than as imprisonment in default of payment of the fine. 
(2) The imprisonment awarded under this section may be in addition to a substantive sentence of 
imprisonment for the maximum term awardable by the Magistrate under section 29. 
31. Sentence in cases of conviction of several offences at one trial.—(1) When a person is convicted at 
one trial of two or more offences, the Court may, subject to the provisions of section 71 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of  1860), sentence him for such offences, to the several punishments prescribed therefor which such 
Court is competent to inflict; such punishments when consisting of imprisonment to commence the one after 
the expiration of the other in such order as the Court may direct, unless the Court directs that such punishments 
shall run concurrently.  
(2) In the case of consecutive sentences, it shall not be necessary for the Court by reason only of the 
aggregate punishment for the several offences being in excess of the punishment which it is competent to 
inflict on conviction of a single offence, to send the offender for trial before a higher Court: 
Provided that— 
(a) in no case shall such person be sentenced to imprisonment for a longer period than fourteen  
years;  
(b) the aggregate punishment shall not exceed twice the amount of punishment which the Court 
is competent to inflict for a single offence. 
(3) For the purpose of appeal by a convicted person, the aggregate of the consecutive sentences 
passed against him under this section shall be deemed to be a single sentence.     
32. Mode of conferring powers.—(1) In conferring powers under this Code, the High Court or the 
State Government, as the case may be, may, by order, empower persons specially by name or in virtue of 
their offices or classes of officials generally be their official titles.  
 (2) Every such order shall take effect from the date on which it is communicated to the person so 
empowered. 
33. Powers of officers appointed.—Whenever any person holding an office in the service of 
Government who has been invested by the High Court or the State Government with any powers under 
this Code throughout any local area is appointed to an equal or higher office of the same nature, within a 
like local area under the same State Government, he shall, unless the High Court or the State Government, 
as the case may be, otherwise directs, or has otherwise directed, exercise the same powers in the local 
area in which he is so appointed.  
34. Withdrawal of powers.—(1) The High Court or the State Government, as the case may be, may 
withdraw all or any of the powers conferred by it under this Code on any person or by any officer 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 5, for “five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

38 
 
subordinate to it. 
(2) Any powers conferred by the Chief Judicial Magistrate or by the District Magistrate may be 
withdrawn by the respective Magistrate by whom such powers were conferred. 
35. Powers of Judges and Magistrates exercisable by their successors-in-office.—(1) Subject to 
the other provisions of this Code, the powers and duties of a Judge or Magistrate may be exercised or 
performed by his successor-in-office. 
(2) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office of any Additional or Assistant 
Sessions Judge, the Sessions Judge shall determine by order in writing the Judge who shall, for the 
purposes of this Code or of any proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed to be the successor-in-office 
of such Additional or Assistant Sessions Judge.  
(3) When there is any doubt as to who is the successor-in-office of any Magistrate, the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall determine by order in writing the 
Magistrate who shall, for the purpose of this Code or of any proceedings or order thereunder, be deemed 
to be the successor-in-office of such Magistrate. 
CHAPTER IV 
A.—POWERS OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS OF POLICE 
36. Powers of superior officers of police.—Police officers superior in rank to an officer in charge of 
a police station may exercise the same powers, throughout the local area to which they are appointed, as 
may be exercised by such officer within the limits of his station. 
B.—AID TO THE MAGISTRATES AND THE POLICE 
37. Public when to assist Magistrates and police.—Every person is bound to assist a Magistrate or 
police officer reasonably demanding his aid— 
(a) in the taking or preventing the escape of any other person whom such Magistrate or police 
officer is authorised to arrest; or 
(b) in the prevention or suppression of a breach of the peace; or 
(c) in the prevention of any injury attempted to be committed to any railway, canal, telegraph or 
public property. 
38. Aid to person, other than police officer, executing warrant.—When a warrant is directed to a 
person other than a police officer, any other person may aid in the execution of such warrant, if the person 
to whom the warrant is directed be near at hand and acting in the execution of the warrant. 
39. Public to give information of certain offences.—(1) Every person, aware of the commission of, 
or of the intention of any other person to commit, any offence punishable under any of the following 
sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely:— 
(i) sections 121 to 126, both inclusive, and section 130 (that is to say, offences against the State specified 
in Chapter VI of the said Code); 
(ii) sections 143, 144, 145, 147 and 148 (that is to say, offences against the public tranquillity 
specified in Chapter VIII of the said Code); 
(iii) sections 161 to 165A, both inclusive (that is to say, offences relating to illegal 
gratification); 
(iv) sections 272 to 278, both inclusive (that is to say, offences relating to adulteration of food 
and drugs, etc.); 
(v) sections 302, 303 and 304 (that is to say, offences affecting life); 
1[(va) section 364A (that is to say, offence relating to kidnapping for ransom, etc.);] 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 3 (w.e.f. 22-05-1993). 

39 
 
(vi) section 382 (that is to say, offence of theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or 
restraint in order to the committing of the theft); 
(vii) sections 392 to 399, both inclusive, and section 402 (that is to say, offences of robbery 
and dacoity); 
(viii) section 409 (that is to say, offence relating to criminal breach of trust by public servant, 
etc.); 
(ix) sections 431 and 439, both inclusive (that is to say, offences of mischief against property); 
(x) sections 449 and 450 (that is to say, offence of house trespass); 
 (xi) sections 456 to 460, both inclusive  (that is to say, offences of lurking house trespass); and  
(xii) sections 489A to 489E, both inclusive (that is to say, offences relating to currency notes 
and bank notes), 
shall, in the absence of any reasonable excuse, the burden of proving which excuse shall lie upon the 
person so aware, forthwith give information to the nearest Magistrate or police officer of such 
commission or intention. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, the term “offence” includes any act committed at any place out 
of India which would constitute an offence if committed in India. 
40. Duty of officers employed in connection with the affairs of a village to make certain 
report.—(1) Every officer employed in connection with the affairs of a village and every person residing 
in a village shall forthwith communicate to the nearest Magistrate or to the officer in charge of the nearest 
police station, whichever is nearer, any information which he may possess respecting— 
(a) the permanent or temporary residence of any notorious receiver or vendor of stolen property 
in or near such village; 
(b) the resort to any place within, or the passage through, such village of any person whom he 
knows, or reasonably suspects, to be a thug, robber, escaped convict or proclaimed offender; 
(c) the commission of, or intention to commit, in or near such village any non-bailable offence or 
any offence punishable under section 143, section 144, section 145, section 147, or section 148 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(d) the occurrence in or near such village of any sudden or unnatural death or of any death under 
suspicious circumstances or the discovery in or near such village of any corpse or part of a corpse, in 
circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion that such a death has occurred or the 
disappearance from such village of any person in circumstances which lead to a reasonable suspicion 
that a non-bailable offence has been committed in respect of such person; 
(e) the commission of, or intention to commit, at any place out of India near such village any act 
which, if committed in India, would be an offence punishable under any of the following sections of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely, 231 to 238 (both inclusive), 302, 304, 382, 392 to 399 
(both inclusive), 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457 to 460 (both inclusive), 489A, 489B, 489C and 489D; 
(f) any matter likely to affect the maintenance of order or the prevention of crime or the safety of 
person or property respecting which the District Magistrate, by general or special order made with the 
previous sanction of the State Government, has directed him to communicate information. 
(2) In this section,— 
(i) “village” includes village-lands; 
(ii) the expression “proclaimed offender” includes any person proclaimed as an offender by any 
Court or authority in any territory in India to which this Code does not extend, in respect of any act 
which if committed in the territories to which this Code extends, would be an offence punishable 
under any of the following sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely, 302, 304, 382, 
392 to 399 (both inclusive), 402, 435, 436, 449, 450 and 457 to 460 (both inclusive); 
(iii) the words “officer employed in connection with the affairs of the village” means a member 

40 
 
of the panchayat of the village and includes the headman and every officer or other person appointed 
to perform any function connected with the administration of the village. 
CHAPTER V 
ARREST OF  PERSONS 
41. When police may arrest without warrant.—(1) Any police officer may without an order from a 
Magistrate    and without a warrant, arrest any person— 
1[(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable offence; 
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been 
received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years 
whether with or without fine, if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:— 
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such complaint, information, or 
suspicion that such person has committed the said offence; 
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary— 
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or 
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or 
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear or 
tampering with such evidence in any manner; or 
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the 
Court or to the police officer; or 
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court whenever required cannot 
be ensured, 
and the police officer shall record while making such arrest, his reasons in writing: 
2[Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is not required under 
the provisions of this sub-section, record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.]; 
(ba) against whom credible information has been received that he has committed a cognizable 
offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than seven years whether 
with or without fine or with death sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of 
that information that such person has committed the said offence;] 
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code or by order of the State 
Government; or 
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected to be stolen 
property and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an offence with reference to 
such thing; or 
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has escaped, or 
attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or 
(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or 
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or 
credible information has been  received, or a  reasonable suspicion exists, of his having  been  
concerned in, any  act  committed  at   any place out  of  India  which, if  committed  in  India, would  
have  been  punishable  as  an  offence, and  for  which he  is, under any law relating to extradition, or 
otherwise, liable to be apprehended or detained in custody in India; or 
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under sub-section (5) of 
section 356; or 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 5, for cls. (a) and (b) (w.e.f. 1-11-2010). 
2. Ins. by Act 41 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2-11-2010).  

41 
 
 (i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received from another 
police officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other 
cause for which the arrest is to be made and it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be 
arrested without a warrant by the officer who issued the requisition. 
1[(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person concerned in a non-cognizable offence or 
against whom a complaint has been made or credible information has been received or reasonable 
suspicion exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant or order of a 
Magistrate.] 
2[41A. Notice of appearance before police officer.—(1) 3[The police officer shall], in all cases 
where the arrest of a person is not required under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 41, issue a 
notice directing the person against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information 
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence, to appear 
before him or at such other place as may be specified in the notice. 
(2) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be the duty of that person to comply with the 
terms of the notice. 
(3) Where such person complies and continues to comply with the notice, he shall not be arrested in 
respect of the offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of 
the opinion that he ought to be arrested. 
4[(4) Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with the terms of the notice or is unwilling to 
identify himself, the police officer may, subject to such orders as may have been passed by a competent 
Court in this behalf, arrest him for the offence mentioned in the notice.] 
41B. Procedure of arrest and duties of officer making arrest.—Every police officer while making 
an arrest shall— 
(a) bear an accurate, visible and clear identification of his name which will facilitate easy 
identification; 
(b) prepare a memorandum of arrest which shall be— 
(i) attested by at least one witness, who is a member of the family of the person arrested or a 
respectable member of the locality where the arrest is made; 
(ii) countersigned by the person arrested; and 
(c) inform the person arrested, unless the memorandum is attested by a member of his family, that 
he has a right to have a relative or a friend named by him to be informed of his arrest. 
41C. Control room at districts.—(1) The State Government shall establish a police control room— 
(a) in every district; and 
(b) at State level. 
(2) The State Government shall cause to be displayed on the notice board kept outside the control rooms at 
every district, the names and addresses of the persons arrested and the name and designation of the police 
officers who made the arrests. 
(3) The control room at the Police Headquarters at the State level shall collect from time to time, details 
about the persons arrested, nature of the offence with which they are charged and maintain a database for the 
information of the general public. 
41D. Right of arrested person to meet an advocate of his choice during interrogation.—When any 
person is arrested and interrogated by the police, he shall be entitled to meet an advocate of his choice during 
interrogation, though not throughout interrogation.] 
42. Arrest on refusal to give name and residence.—(1) When any person who, in the presence of a 
police officer, has committed or has been accused of committing a non-cognizable offence refuses, on demand 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 5, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 1-11-2010).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-2010). 
3. Subs. by Act 41 of 2010, s. 3, for “The police officer may” (w.e.f. 2-11-2010).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 2-11-2010).  

42 
 
of such officer, to give his name and residence or gives a name or residence which such officer has reason to 
believe to be false, he may be arrested by such officer in order that his name or residence may be ascertained. 
(2) When the true name and residence of such person have been ascertained, he shall be released on his 
executing a bond, with or without sureties, to appear before a Magistrate if so required: 
Provided that, if such person is not resident in India, the bond shall be secured by a surety or sureties 
resident in India. 
(3) Should the true name and residence of such person not be ascertained within twenty-four hours from 
the time of arrest or should he fail to execute the bond, or, if so required, to furnish sufficient sureties, he shall 
forthwith be forwarded to the nearest Magistrate having jurisdiction. 
43. Arrest by private person and procedure on such arrest.—(1) Any private person may arrest or 
cause to be arrested any person who in his presence commits a non-bailable and cognizable offence, or any 
proclaimed offender, and, without unnecessary delay, shall make over or cause to be made over any person so 
arrested to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be taken in 
custody to the nearest police station. 
(2) If there is reason to believe that such person comes under the provisions of section 41, a police officer 
shall re-arrest him. 
(3) If there is reason to believe that he has committed a non-cognizable offence, and he refuses on the 
demand of a police officer to give his name and residence, or gives a name or residence which such officer has 
reason to believe to be false, he shall be dealt with under the provisions of section 42; but if there is no 
sufficient reason to believe that he has committed any offence, he shall be at once released. 
44. Arrest by Magistrate.—(1) When any offence is committed in the presence of a Magistrate, whether 
Executive or Judicial, within his local jurisdiction, he may himself arrest or order any person to arrest the 
offender, and may thereupon, subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail, commit the offender to 
custody. 
(2) Any Magistrate, whether Executive or Judicial, may at any time arrest or direct the arrest, in his 
presence, within his local jurisdiction, of any person for whose arrest he is competent at the time and in the 
circumstances to issue a warrant. 
45. Protection of members of the Armed Forces from arrest.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in sections 41 to 44 (both inclusive), no member of the Armed Forces of the Union shall be arrested for 
anything done or purported to be done by him in the discharge of his official duties except after obtaining the 
consent of the Central Government. 
(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall apply to 
such class or category of the members of the Force charged with the maintenance of public order as may be 
specified therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section shall apply as if 
for the expression “Central Government” occurring therein, the expression “State Government” were substituted. 
46. Arrest how made.—(1) In making an arrest the police officer or other person making the same shall 
actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by 
word or action: 
1[Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her 
submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed and, unless the circumstances 
otherwise require or unless the police officer is a female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the 
woman for making her arrest.] 
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police 
officer or other person may use all means necessary to effect the arrest. 
(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not accused of an offence 
punishable with death or with imprisonment for life. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

43 
 
1[(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and 
where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall, by making a written report, obtain 
the prior permission of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is 
committed or the arrest is to be made.] 
47. Search of place entered by person sought to be arrested.—(1) If any person acting under warrant of 
arrest, or any police officer having authority to arrest, has reason to believe that the person to be arrested has 
entered into, or is within, any place, any person residing in, or being in charge of, such place shall, on demand 
of such person acting as aforesaid or such police officer, allow him free ingress thereto, and afford all 
reasonable facilities for a search therein. 
(2) If ingress to such place cannot be obtained under sub-section (1), it shall be lawful in any case for a 
person acting under a warrant and in any case in which a warrant may issue, but cannot be obtained without 
affording the person to be arrested an opportunity of escape, for a police officer to enter such place and search 
therein, and in order to effect an entrance into such place, to break open any outer or inner door or window of 
any house or place, whether that of the person to be arrested or of any other person, if after notification of his 
authority and purpose, and demand of admittance duly made, he cannot otherwise obtain admittance: 
Provided that, if any such place is an apartment in the actual occupancy of a female (not being the persons 
to be arrested) who, according to custom, does not appear in public, such person or police officer shall, before 
entering such apartment, give notice to such female that she is at liberty to withdraw and shall afford her every 
reasonable facility for withdrawing, and may then break open the apartment and enter it. 
 (3) Any police officer or other person authorised to make an arrest may break open any outer or inner 
door or window of any house or place in order to liberate himself or any other person who, having lawfully 
entered for the purpose of making an arrest, is detained therein. 
48. Pursuit of offenders into other jurisdictions.—A police officer may, for the purpose of arresting 
without warrant any person whom he is authorised to arrest, pursue such person into any place in India. 
49. No unnecessary restraint.—The person arrested shall not be subjected to more restraint than is 
necessary to prevent his escape. 
50. Person arrested to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail.—(1) Every police officer 
or other person arresting any person without warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the 
offence for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest. 
(2) Where a police officer arrests without warrant any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable 
offence, he shall inform the person arrested that he is entitled to be released on bail and that he may arrange for 
sureties on his behalf. 
2[50A. Obligation of person making arrest to inform about the arrest, etc., to a nominated person.—(1) 
Every police officer or other person making any arrest under this Code shall forthwith give the information 
regarding such arrest and place where the arrested person is being held to any of his friends, relatives or such 
other persons as may be disclosed or nominated by the arrested person for the purpose of giving such 
information. 
(2) The police officer shall inform the arrested person of his rights under sub-section (1) as soon as he is 
brought to the police station. 
(3) An entry of the fact as to who has been informed of the arrest of such person shall be made in a book to be 
kept in the police station in such form as may be prescribed in this behalf by the State Government. 
(4) It shall be the duty of the Magistrate before whom such arrested person is produced, to satisfy himself that the 
requirements of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) have been complied with in respect of such arrested person.] 
51. Search of arrested person.—(1) Whenever a person is arrested by a police officer under a warrant which 
does not provide for the taking of bail, or under a warrant which provides for the taking of bail but the person 
arrested cannot furnish bail, and 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 6 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

44 
 
whenever a person is arrested without warrant, or by a private person under a warrant, and cannot legally be 
admitted to bail, or is unable to furnish bail, 
the officer making the arrest or, when the arrest is made by a private person, the police officer to whom he 
makes over the person arrested, may search such person, and place in safe custody all articles, other than necessary 
wearing-apparel, found upon him and where any article is seized from the arrested person, a receipt showing the 
articles taken in possession by the police officer shall be given to such person. 
(2) Whenever it is necessary to cause a female to be searched, the search shall be made by another female with 
strict regard to decency. 
52. Power to seize offensive weapons.—The officer or other person making any arrest under this Code may 
take from the person arrested any offensive weapons which he has about his person, and shall deliver all weapons so 
taken to the Court or officer before which or whom the officer or person making the arrest is required by this Code 
to produce the person arrested. 
53. Examination of accused by medical practitioner at the request of police officer.—(1) When a person is 
arrested on a charge of committing an offence of such a nature and alleged to have been committed under such 
circumstances that there are reasonable grounds for believing that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to 
the commission of an offence, it shall be lawful for a registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police 
officer not below the rank of sub-inspector, and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to 
make such an examination of the person arrested as is reasonably necessary in order to ascertain the facts which may 
afford such evidence, and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose. 
(2) Whenever the person of a female is to be examined under this section, the examination shall be made only 
by, or under the supervision of, a female registered medical practitioner. 
1[Explanation.—In this section and in sections 53A and 54,— 
(a) “examination” shall include the examination of blood, blood stains, semen, swabs in case of sexual 
offences, sputum and sweat, hair samples and finger nail clippings by the use of modern and scientific 
techniques including DNA profiling and such other tests which the registered medical practitioner thinks 
necessary in a particular case; 
(b) “registered medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who possesses any medical qualification 
as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) and whose name has 
been entered in a State Medical Register.] 
2[53A. Examination of person accused of rape by medical practitioner.—(1) When a person is arrested on a 
charge of committing an offence of rape or an attempt to commit rape and there are reasonable grounds for believing 
that an examination of his person will afford evidence as to the commission of such offence, it shall be lawful for a 
registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government or by a local authority and in the absence 
of such a practitioner within the radius of sixteen kilometres from the place where the offence has been committed, by 
any other registered medical practitioner, acting at the request of a police officer not below the rank of a sub-inspector, 
and for any person acting in good faith in his aid and under his direction, to make such an examination of the arrested 
person and to use such force as is reasonably necessary for that purpose. 
(2) The registered medical practitioner conducting such examination shall, without delay, examine such person 
and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely:— 
(i) the name and address of the accused and of the person by whom he was brought, 
(ii) the age of the accused, 
(iii) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the accused, 
(iv) the description of material taken from the person of the accused for DNA profiling, and 
(v) other material particulars in reasonable detail. 
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at. 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 8, for the Explanation (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

45 
 
(4) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report. 
(5) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay, forward the report to the investigating officer, who 
shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 173 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of            
sub-section (5) of that section.] 
1[54. Examination of arrested person by medical officer.—(1) When any person is arrested, he shall be 
examined by a medical officer in the service of Central or State Government, and in case the medical officer is not 
available, by a registered medical practitioner soon after the arrest is made: 
Provided that where the arrested person is a female, the examination of the body shall be made only by or under 
the supervision of a female medical officer, and in case the female medical officer is not available, by a female 
registered medical practitioner. 
(2) The medical officer or a registered medical practitioner so examining the arrested person shall prepare the 
record of such examination, mentioning therein any injuries or marks of violence upon the person arrested, and the 
approximate time when such injuries or marks may have been inflicted. 
(3) Where an examination is made under sub-section (1), a copy of the report of such examination shall be 
furnished by the medical officer or registered medical practitioner, as the case may be, to the arrested person or the 
person nominated by such arrested person.] 
2[54A. Identification of person arrested.—Where a person is arrested on a charge of committing an offence 
and his identification by any other person or persons is considered necessary for the purpose of investigation of such 
offence, the Court, having jurisdiction may, on the request of the officer in charge of a police station, direct the 
person so arrested to subject himself to identification by any person or persons in such manner as the Court may 
deem fit:] 
3[Provided that, if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically disabled, such process of 
identification shall take place under the supervision of a Judicial Magistrate who shall take appropriate steps to 
ensure that such person identifies the person arrested using methods that person is comfortable with: 
Provided further that if the person identifying the person arrested is mentally or physically disabled, the 
identification process shall be videographed.] 
55. Procedure when police officer deputes subordinate to arrest without warrant.—(1) When any officer in 
charge of a police station or any police officer making an investigation under Chapter XII requires any officer 
subordinate to him to arrest without a warrant (otherwise than in his presence) any person who may lawfully be 
arrested without a warrant, he shall deliver to the officer required to make the arrest an order in writing, specifying 
the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to  be  made and the officer so 
required shall, before making the arrest, notify to the person to be arrested the substance of the order and, if so 
required by such person, shall show him the order. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the power of a police officer to arrest a person under section 41.  
4[55A. Health and safety of arrested person.—It shall be the duty of the person having the custody 
of an accused to take reasonable care of the health and safety of the accused.]  
56. Person arrested to be taken before Magistrate or officer in charge of police station.—A 
police officer making an arrest without warrant shall, without unnecessary delay and subject to the 
provisions herein contained as to bail, take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the case, or before the officer in charge of a police station. 
57. Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four hours.—No police officer shall 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 8, for section 54  (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 11 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 12 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
4. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 9 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

46 
 
detain in custody a person arrested without warrant for a longer period than under all the circumstances of 
the case is reasonable, and such period shall not, in the absence of a special order of a Magistrate under 
section 167, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of 
arrest to the Magistrate’s Court. 
58. Police to report apprehensions.—Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the District 
Magistrate, or, if he so directs, to the Sub-divisional Magistrate, the cases of all persons arrested without 
warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whether such persons have been admitted to bail or 
otherwise. 
59. Discharge of person apprehended.—No person who has been arrested by a police officer shall 
be discharged except on his own bond, or on bail, or under the special order of a Magistrate. 
60. Power, on escape, to pursue and retake.—(1) If a person in lawful custody escapes or is 
rescued, the person from whose custody he escaped or was rescued may immediately pursue and arrest 
him in any place in India. 
(2) The provisions of section 47 shall apply to arrests under sub-section (1) although the person 
making any such arrest is not acting under a warrant and is not a police officer having authority to arrest. 
1[60A. Arrest to be made strictly according to the Code.—No arrest shall be made except in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code or any other law for the time being in force providing for 
arrest.] 
CHAPTER VI 
PROCESSES TO COMPEL APPEARANCE 
A.—Summons 
61. Form of summons.—Every summons issued by a Court under this Code shall be in writing, in 
duplicate, signed by the presiding officer of such Court or by such other officer as the High Court may, 
from time to time, by rule direct, and shall bear the seal of the Court. 
62. Summons how served.—(1) Every summons shall be served by a police officer, or subject to 
such rules as the State Government may make in this behalf, by an officer of the Court issuing it or other 
public servant. 
(2) The summons shall, if practicable, be served personally on the person summoned, by delivering or 
tendering to him one of the duplicates of the summons. 
 (3) Every person on whom a summons is so served shall, if so required by the serving officer, sign a 
receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate. 
63. Service of summons on corporate bodies and societies.—Service of a summons on a 
corporation may be effected by serving it on the secretary, local manager or other principal officer of the 
corporation, or by letter sent by registered post, addressed to the chief officer of the corporation in India, 
in which case the service shall be deemed to have been effected when the letter would arrive in ordinary course 
of post. 
Explanation.—In this section, “corporation” means an incorporated company or other body corporate and 
includes a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). 
64. Service when persons summoned cannot be found.—Where the person summoned cannot, by the exercise 
of due diligence, be  found, the summons may be served by leaving one of the duplicates for him with some adult 
male member of his family residing with him, and the person with whom the summons is so left shall, if so required 
by the serving officer, sign a receipt therefor on the back of the other duplicate. 
Explanation.—A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section. 
65. Procedure when service cannot be effected as before provided.—If service cannot by the exercise of due 
diligence be effected as provided in section 62, section 63 or section 64, the serving officer shall affix one of the 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.10 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

47 
 
duplicates of the summons to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which the person summoned 
ordinarily resides; and thereupon the Court, after making such inquiries as it thinks fit, may either declare that the 
summons has been duly served or order fresh service in such manner as it considers proper. 
66. Service on Government servant.—(1) Where the person summoned is in the active service of the 
Government, the Court issuing the summons shall ordinarily send it in duplicate to the head of the office in which 
such person is employed; and such head shall thereupon cause the summons to be served in the manner provided by 
section 62, and shall return it to the Court under his signature with the endorsement required by that section. 
(2) Such signature shall be evidence of due service. 
67. Service of summons outside local limits.—When a Court desires that a summons issued by it shall be 
served at any place outside its local jurisdiction, it shall ordinarily send such summons in duplicate to a Magistrate 
within whose local jurisdiction the person  summoned resides, or is, to be there served.  
68. Proof of service in such cases and when serving officer not present.—(1) When a summons issued by a 
Court is served outside its local jurisdiction, and in any case where the officer who has served a summons is not 
present at the hearing of the case, an affidavit, purporting to be made before a Magistrate, that such summons has 
been served, and a duplicate of the summons purporting to be endorsed (in the manner provided by section 62 or 
section 64) by the person to whom it was delivered or tendered or with whom it was left, shall be admissible in 
evidence, and the statements made therein shall be deemed to be correct unless and until the contrary is proved. 
(2) The affidavit mentioned in this section may be attached to the duplicate of the summons and returned to the 
Court. 
69. Service of summons on witness by post.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding 
sections of this Chapter, a Court issuing a summons to a witness may, in addition to and simultaneously with the 
issue of such summons, direct a copy of the summons to be served by registered post addressed to the witness at the 
place where he ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain. 
(2) When an acknowledgement purporting to be signed by the witness or an endorsement purporting to be made 
by a postal employee that the witness refused to take delivery of the summons has been received, the Court issuing 
the summons may declare that the summons has been duly served. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands U.T. 
In section 69 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1974 in is application to the Union Territories of the 
Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshdeep,— 
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words “to be served by registered post” the words “or of the substance 
thereof to be served by wireless message” shall be inserted. 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “that the witness refused to take delivery of the summons” the words “or a 
wireless messenger that the witness refused to take delivery of the summons or the message, as the ease may 
be” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Andaman and Nicobar Islands U.T. Act 6 of 1977, s. 2.] 
B.—Warrant of arrest 
70. Form of warrant of arrest and duration.—(1) Every warrant of arrest issued by a Court under this Code 
shall be in writing, signed by the presiding officer of such Court and shall bear the seal of the Court. 
 (2) Every such warrant shall remain in force until it is cancelled by the Court which issued it, or until it is 
executed. 
71. Power to direct security to be taken.—(1) Any Court issuing a warrant for the arrest of any person may 

48 
 
in its discretion direct by endorsement on the warrant that, if such person executes a bond with sufficient sureties 
for his attendance before the Court at a specified time and thereafter until otherwise directed by the Court, the 
officer to whom the warrant is directed shall take such security and shall release such person from custody. 
(2) The endorsement shall state— 
(a) the number of sureties; 
(b) the amount in which they and the person for whose arrest the warrant is issued, are to be respectively 
bound; 
(c) the time at which he is to attend before the Court. 
(3) Whenever security is taken under this section, the officer to whom the warrant is directed shall forward the 
bond to the Court. 
72. Warrants to whom directed.—(1) A warrant of arrest shall ordinarily be directed to one or more police 
officers; but the Court issuing such a warrant may, if its immediate execution is necessary and no police officer is 
immediately available, direct it to any other person or persons, and such person or persons shall execute the same. 
(2) When a warrant is directed to more officers or persons than one, it may be executed by all, or by any one or 
more of them. 
73. Warrant may be directed to any person.—(1) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first 
class may direct a warrant to any person within his local jurisdiction for the arrest of any escaped convict, 
proclaimed offender or of any person who is accused of a non-bailable offence and is evading arrest. 
(2) Such person shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the warrant, and shall execute it if the person for 
whose arrest it was issued, is in, or enters on, any land or other property under his charge. 
(3) When the person against whom such warrant is issued is arrested, he shall be made over with the warrant to 
the nearest police officer, who shall cause him to be taken before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, unless 
security is taken under section 71. 
74. Warrant directed to police officer.—A warrant directed to any police officer may also be executed by any 
other police officer whose name is endorsed upon the warrant by the officer to whom it is directed or endorsed. 
75. Notification of substance of warrant.—The police officer or other person executing a warrant of arrest 
shall notify the substance thereof to the person to be arrested, and, if so required, shall show him the warrant. 
76. Person arrested to be brought before Court without delay.—The police officer or other person executing 
a warrant of arrest shall (subject to the provisions of section 71 as to security) without unnecessary delay bring the 
person arrested before the Court before which he is required by law to produce such person: 
Provided that such delay shall not, in any case, exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the 
journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate’s Court. 
77. Where warrant may be executed.—A warrant of arrest may be executed at any place in India. 
78. Warrant forwarded for execution outside jurisdiction.—(1) When a warrant is to be executed outside the 
local jurisdiction of the Court issuing it, such Court may, instead of directing the warrant to a police officer within 
its jurisdiction, forward it by post or otherwise to any Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police or 
Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction it is to be executed; and the Executive 
Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner shall endorse his name thereon, and if practicable, cause it to 
be executed in the manner hereinbefore provided. 
 (2) The Court issuing a warrant under sub-section (1) shall forward, along with the warrant, the substance of 
the information against the person to be arrested together with such documents, if any, as may be sufficient to enable 
the Court acting under section 81 to decide whether bail should or should not be granted to the person. 
79. Warrant directed to police officer for execution outside jurisdiction.—(1) When a warrant directed to a 
police officer is to be executed beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court issuing the same, he shall ordinarily take it 

49 
 
for endorsement either to an Executive Magistrate or to a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of 
a police station, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed. 
(2) Such Magistrate or police officer shall endorse his name thereon and such endorsement shall be sufficient 
authority to the police officer to whom the warrant is directed to execute the same, and the local police shall, if so 
required, assist such officer in executing such warrant. 
 (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay occasioned by obtaining the endorsement of the 
Magistrate or police officer within whose local jurisdiction the warrant is to be executed will prevent such 
execution, the police officer to whom it is directed may execute the same without such endorsement in any place 
beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court which issued it. 
80. Procedure on arrest of person against whom warrant issued.—When a warrant of arrest is executed 
outside the district in which it was issued, the person arrested shall, unless the Court which issued the warrant is 
within thirty kilometres of the place of arrest or is nearer than the Executive Magistrate or District Superintendent  
of  Police or  Commissioner of Police within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the arrest was made, or unless 
security is taken under section 71, be taken before such Magistrate or District Superintendent or Commissioner. 
81. Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested is brought.—(1) The Executive Magistrate 
or District Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police shall, if the person arrested appears to be the person 
intended by the Court which issued the warrant, direct his removal in custody to such Court: 
Provided that, if the offence is bailable, and such person is ready and willing to give bail to the satisfaction of 
such Magistrate, District Superintendent or Commissioner, or a direction has been endorsed under section 71 on the 
warrant and such person is ready and willing to give the security required by such direction, the Magistrate, District 
Superintendent or Commissioner shall take such bail or security, as the case may be, and forward the bond, to the 
Court which issued the warrant: 
Provided further that if the offence is a non-bailable one, it shall be lawful for the Chief Judicial Magistrate 
(subject to the provisions of section 437), or the Sessions Judge, of the district in which the arrest is made on 
consideration of the information and the documents referred to in sub-section (2) of section 78, to release such 
person on bail. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a police officer from taking security under section 71. 
C.—Proclamation and attachment 
82. Proclamation for person absconding.—(1) If any Court has reason to believe (whether after taking 
evidence or not) that any person against whom a warrant has been issued by it has absconded or is concealing 
himself so that such warrant cannot be executed, such Court may publish a written proclamation requiring him to 
appear at a specified place and at a specified time not less than thirty days from the date of publishing such 
proclamation. 
(2) The proclamation shall be published as follows:— 
(i) (a) it shall be publicly read in some conspicuous place of the town or village in which such person 
ordinarily resides; 
(b) it shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the house or homestead in which such person ordinarily 
resides or to some conspicuous place of such town or village; 
(c) a copy thereof shall be affixed to some conspicuous part of the Court-house; 
(ii) the Court may also, if it thinks fit, direct a copy of the proclamation to be published in a daily 
newspaper circulating in the place in which such person ordinarily resides. 
 (3) A statement in writing by the Court issuing the proclamation to the effect that the proclamation was duly 
published on a specified day, in the manner specified in clause (i) of sub-section (2), shall be conclusive evidence 
that the requirements of this section have been complied with, and that the proclamation was published on such day. 

50 
 
1[(4) Where a proclamation published under sub-section (1) is in respect of a person accused of an offence 
punishable under section 302, 304, 364, 367, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 400, 402, 436, 449, 459 or 
460 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and such person fails to appear at the specified place and time required 
by the proclamation, the Court may, after making such inquiry as it thinks fit, pronounce him a proclaimed offender 
and make a declaration to that effect. 
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) shall apply to a declaration made by the Court under 
sub-section (4) as they apply to the proclamation published under sub-section (1).] 
83.  Attachment of property of person absconding.—(1) The Court issuing a proclamation under 
section 82 may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, at any time after the issue of the proclamation, order 
the attachment of any property, movable or immovable, or both, belonging to the proclaimed person: 
Provided that where at the time of the issue of the proclamation the Court is satisfied, by affidavit or 
otherwise, that the person in relation to whom the proclamation is to be issued,— 
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or 
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of his property from the local jurisdiction of the 
Court, 
it may order the attachment simultaneously with the issue of the proclamation. 
(2) Such order shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such person within the 
district in which it is made; and it shall authorise the attachment of any property belonging to such person 
without such district when endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose district such property is 
situate. 
(3) If the property ordered to be attached is a debt or other movable property, the attachment under 
this section shall be made— 
(a) by seizure; or 
(b) by the appointment of a receiver; or 
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the delivery of such property to the proclaimed person or to 
any one on his behalf; or 
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit. 
(4) If the property ordered to be attached is immovable, the attachment under this section shall, in the 
case of land paying revenue to the State Government, be made through the Collector of the district in 
which the land is situate, and in all other cases— 
(a) by taking possession; or 
(b) by the appointment of a receiver; or 
(c) by an order in writing prohibiting the payment of rent on delivery of property to the 
proclaimed person or to any one on his behalf; or 
(d) by all or any two of such methods, as the Court thinks fit. 
(5) If the property ordered to be attached consists of live-stock or is of a perishable nature, the Court 
may, if it thinks it expedient, order immediate sale thereof, and in such case the proceeds of the sale shall 
abide the order of the Court. 
 (6) The powers, duties and liabilities of a receiver appointed under this section shall be the same as 
those of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908). 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 12 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

51 
 
84. Claims and objections to attachment.—(1) If any claim is preferred to, or objection made to the 
attachment of, any property attached under section 83, within six months from the date of such 
attachment, by any person other than the proclaimed person, on the ground that the claimant or objector 
has an interest in such property, and that such interest is not liable to attachment under section 83, the 
claim or objection shall be inquired into, and may be allowed or disallowed in whole or in part: 
Provided that any claim preferred or objection made within the period allowed by this sub-section 
may, in the event of the death of the claimant or objector, be continued by his legal representative. 
(2) Claims or objections under sub-section (1) may be preferred or made in the Court by which the 
order of attachment is issued, or, if the claim or objection is in respect of property attached under an order 
endorsed under sub-section (2) of section 83, in the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate of the district 
in which the attachment is made. 
(3) Every such claim or objection shall be inquired into by the Court in which it is preferred or made: 
Provided that, if it is preferred or made in the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate, he may make it 
over for disposal to any Magistrate subordinate to him. 
(4) Any person whose claim or objection has been disallowed in whole or in part by an order under 
sub-section (1) may, within a period of one year from the date of such order, institute a suit to establish 
the right which he claims in respect of the property in dispute; but subject to the result of such suit, if any, 
the order shall be conclusive. 
85. Release, sale and restoration of attached property.—(1) If the proclaimed person appears 
within the time specified in the proclamation, the Court shall make an order releasing the property from 
the attachment. 
(2) If the proclaimed person does not appear within the time specified in the proclamation, the 
property under the attachment shall be at the disposal of the State Government; but it shall not be sold 
until the expiration of six months from the date of the attachment and until any claim preferred or 
objection made under section 84 has been disposed of under that section, unless it is subject to speedy and 
natural decay, or the Court considers that the sale would be for the benefit of the owner; in either of which 
cases the Court may cause it to be sold whenever it thinks fit. 
(3) If, within two years from the date of the attachment, any person whose property is or has been at 
the disposal of the State Government, under sub-section (2), appears voluntarily or is apprehended and 
brought before the Court by whose order the property was attached, or the Court to which such Court is 
subordinate, and proves to the satisfaction of such Court that he did not abscond or conceal himself for 
the purpose of avoiding execution of the warrant, and that he had not such notice of the proclamation as to 
enable him to attend within the time specified therein, such property, or,  if  the  same  has  been  sold, the 
net proceeds of the sale, or, if part only thereof has been sold, the net proceeds of the sale and the residue 
of the property, shall, after satisfying therefrom all costs incurred in consequence of the attachment, be 
delivered to him. 
86. Appeal from order rejecting application for restoration of attached property.—Any person 
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 85, who is aggrieved by any refusal to deliver property or the 
proceeds of the sale thereof may appeal to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the sentences of 
the first-mentioned Court. 
D.—Other rules regarding processes 
87. Issue of warrant in lieu of, or in addition to, summons.—A Court may, in any case in which it 
is empowered by this Code to issue a summons for the appearance of any person, issue, after recording its 
reasons in writing, a warrant for his arrest— 
(a) if, either before the issue of such summons, or after the issue of the same but before the time 
fixed for his appearance, the Court sees reason to believe that he has absconded or will not obey the 
summons; or 

52 
 
(b) if at such time he fails to appear and the summons is proved to have been duly served in time 
to admit of his appearing in accordance therewith and no reasonable excuse is offered for such failure. 
88. Power to take bond for appearance.—When any person for whose appearance or arrest the 
officer presiding in any Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such Court, such 
officer may require such person to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his appearance in such 
Court, or any other Court to which the case may be transferred for trial. 
89. Arrest on breach of bond for appearance.—When any person who is bound by any bond taken 
under this Code to appear before a Court, does not appear, the officer presiding in such Court may issue a 
warrant directing that such person be arrested and produced before him. 
90. Provisions of this Chapter generally applicable to summonses and warrants of arrest.—The 
provisions contained in this Chapter relating to a summons and warrant, and their issue, service and 
execution, shall, so far as may be, apply to every summons and every warrant of arrest issued under this 
Code. 
CHAPTER VII 
PROCESSES TO COMPEL THE PRODUCTION OF THINGS 
A.—Summons to produce 
91. Summons to produce document or other thing.—(1) Whenever any Court or any officer in 
charge of a police station considers that the production of any document or other thing is necessary or 
desirable for the purposes of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code by or 
before such Court or officer, such Court may issue a summons, or such officer a written order, to the 
person in whose possession or power such document or thing is believed to be, requiring him to attend 
and produce it, or to produce it, at the time and place stated in the summons or order. 
(2) Any person required under this section merely to produce a document or other thing shall be 
deemed to have complied with the requisition if he causes such document or thing to be produced instead 
of attending personally to produce the same. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed— 
(a) to affect sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or the Bankers’ 
Books Evidence Act, 1891 (13 of 1891), or 
(b) to apply to a letter, postcard, telegram or other document or any parcel or thing in the custody 
of the postal or telegraph authority. 
92. Procedure as to letters and telegrams.—(1) If any document, parcel or thing in the custody of a 
postal or telegraph authority is, in the opinion of the District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court 
of Session or High Court wanted for the purpose of any investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding 
under this Code, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph authority, as the case may 
be, to deliver the document, parcel or thing to such person as the Magistrate or Court directs. 
(2) If any such document, parcel or thing is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate, whether 
Executive or Judicial, or of any Commissioner of Police or District Superintendent of Police, wanted for 
any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph authority, as the case may be, to cause search to 
be made for and to detain such document, parcel or thing pending the order of a District Magistrate, Chief 
Judicial Magistrate or Court under sub-section (1). 
B.—Search-warrants 
93. When search-warrant may be issued.—(1) (a) Where any Court has reason to believe that a 
person to whom a summons order under section 91 or a requisition under sub-section (1) of section 92 has 

53 
 
been, or might be, addressed, will not or would not produce the document or thing as required by such 
summons or requisition, or 
(b) where such document or thing is not known to the Court to be in the possession of any person, or 
 (c) where the Court considers that the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this 
Code will be served by a general search or inspection, it may issue a search-warrant; and the person to 
whom such warrant is directed, may search or inspect in accordance therewith and the provisions 
hereinafter contained. 
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, specify in the warrant the particular place or part thereof to which 
only the search or inspection shall extend; and the person charged with the execution of such warrant 
shall then search or inspect only the place or part so specified. 
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall authorise any Magistrate other than a District Magistrate or 
Chief Judicial Magistrate to grant a warrant to search for a document, parcel or other thing in the custody 
of the postal or telegraph authority. 
94. Search of place suspected to contain stolen property, forged documents, etc.—(1) If a District 
Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class, upon information and after such 
inquiry as he thinks necessary, has reason to believe that any place is used for the deposit or sale of stolen 
property, or for the deposit, sale or production of any objectionable article to which this section applies, or 
that any such objectionable article is deposited in any place, he may by warrant authorise any police 
officer above the rank of a constable— 
(a) to enter, with such assistance as may be required, such place, 
(b) to search the same in the manner specified in the warrant, 
(c) to take possession of any property or article therein found which he reasonably suspects to be 
stolen property or objectionable article to which this section applies, 
(d) to convey such property or article before a Magistrate, or to guard the same on the spot until 
the offender is taken before a Magistrate, or otherwise to dispose of it in some place of safety, 
(e) to take into custody and carry before a Magistrate every person found in such place who 
appears to have been privy to the deposit, sale or production of any such property or article knowing 
or having reasonable cause to suspect it to be stolen property or,  as the case may be, objectionable 
article to which this section applies. 
(2) The objectionable articles to which this section applies are— 
(a) counterfeit coin; 
(b) pieces of metal made in contravention of the Metal Tokens Act, 1889 (1 of 1889), or brought 
into India in contravention of any notification for the time being in force under section 11 of the 
Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); 
(c) counterfeit currency note; counterfeit stamps; 
(d) forged documents; 
(e) false seals; 
(f) obscene objects referred to in section 292 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(g) instruments or materials used for the production of any of the articles mentioned in clauses (a) 
to (f). 
95. Power to declare certain publications forfeited and to issue search-warrants for the                
same.—(1) Where— 
(a) any newspaper, or book, or 
(b) any document, 
wherever printed, appears to the State Government to contain any matter the publication of which is 

54 
 
punishable under section 124A or section 153A or section 153B or section 292 or section 293 or section 
295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the State Government may, by notification, stating the 
grounds of its opinion, declare every  copy  of  the issue of the newspaper containing such matter, 
and every copy of such book or other document to be forfeited to Government, and thereupon any 
police officer may seize the same wherever found in India and any Magistrate may by warrant authorise 
any police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector to enter upon and search for the same in any 
premises where any copy of such issue, or any such book or other document may be or may be reasonably 
suspected to be. 
(2) In this section and in section 96,— 
(a) “newspaper” and “book” have the same meaning as in the Press and Registration of Books 
Act, 1867 (25 of 1867); 
(b) “document” includes any painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible representation. 
(3) No order passed or action taken under this section shall be called in question in any Court 
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of section 96. 
96. Application to High Court to set aside declaration of forfeiture.—(1) Any person having any 
interest in any newspaper, book or other document, in respect of which a declaration of forfeiture has 
been made under section 95, may, within two months from the date of publication in the Official Gazette 
of such declaration, apply to the High Court to set aside such declaration on the ground that the issue of 
the newspaper, or the book or other document, in respect of which the declaration was made, did not 
contain any such matter as is referred to in sub-section (1) of section 95. 
(2) Every such application shall, where the High Court consists of three or more Judges, be heard and 
determined by a Special Bench of the High Court composed of three Judges and where the High Court 
consists of less than three Judges, such Special Bench shall be composed of all the Judges of that High 
Court. 
(3) On the hearing of any such application with reference to any newspaper, any copy of such 
newspaper may be given in evidence in aid of the proof of the nature or tendency of the words, signs or 
visible representations contained in such newspaper, in respect of which the declaration of forfeiture was 
made. 
(4) The High Court shall, if it is not satisfied that the issue of the newspaper, or the book or other 
document, in respect of which the application has been made, contained any such matter as is referred to 
in sub-section (1) of section 95, set aside the declaration of forfeiture. 
(5) Where there is a difference of opinion among the Judges forming the Special Bench, the decision 
shall be in accordance with the opinion of the majority of those Judges. 
97. Search for persons wrongfully confined.—If any District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate 
or Magistrate of the first class has reason to believe that any person is confined under such circumstances 
that the confinement amounts to an offence, he may issue a search-warrant, and the person to whom such 
warrant is directed may search for the person so confined; and such search shall be made in accordance 
therewith, and the person, if found, shall be immediately taken before a Magistrate, who shall make such 
order as in the circumstances of the case seems proper. 
98. Power to compel restoration of abducted females.—Upon complaint made on oath of the 
abduction or unlawful detention of a woman, or a female child under the age of eighteen years for any 
unlawful purpose, a District Magistrate, Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class may 
make an order for the immediate restoration of such woman to her liberty, or of such female child to her 
husband,  parent,  guardian or other person having the lawful charge of such child, and may compel 
compliance with such order, using such force as may be necessary. 
C.—General provisions relating to searches 
99. Direction, etc., of search-warrants.—The provisions of sections 38, 70, 72, 74, 77, 78 and 79 
shall, so far as may be, apply to all search-warrants issued under section 93, section 94, section 95 or 

55 
 
section 97. 
100. Persons in charge of closed place to allow search.—(1) Whenever any place liable to search or 
inspection under this Chapter is closed, any person  residing in, or being in charge of, such place, shall, on 
demand of the officer or other person executing the warrant, and on production of the warrant, allow him 
free ingress thereto, and afford all reasonable facilities  for a search therein. 
(2)  If ingress into such place cannot be so obtained, the officer or other person executing the warrant 
may proceed in the manner provided by sub-section (2) of section 47.  
(3)  Where any person in or about such place is reasonably suspected of concealing about his person 
any article for which search should be made, such person may  be searched and if such person is a 
woman, the search  shall be made by another woman with strict regard to decency.  
(4) Before making a search under this Chapter, the officer or other person about to make it shall call 
upon two or more independent and respectable inhabitants of the locality in which the place to be 
searched is situate or of any other locality if no such inhabitant of the said locality is available or is 
willing to be a witness to the search, to attend and witness the search and may issue an order in writing to 
them or any of them so to do. 
(5) The search shall be made in their presence, and a list of all things seized in the course of such 
search and of the places in which they are respectively found shall be prepared by such officer or other 
person and signed by such witnesses; but no person witnessing a search under this section shall be 
required to attend the Court as a witness of the search unless specially summoned by it. 
(6) The occupant of the place searched, or some person in his behalf, shall, in every instance, be 
permitted to attend during the search, and a copy of the list prepared under this section, signed by the said 
witnesses, shall be delivered to such occupant or person. 
(7) When any person is searched under sub-section (3), a list of all things taken possession of shall be 
prepared, and a copy thereof shall be delivered to such person. 
(8) Any person who, without reasonable cause, refuses or neglects to attend and witness a search 
under this section, when called upon to do so by an order in writing delivered or tendered to him, shall be 
deemed to have committed an offence under section 187 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
101. Disposal of things found in search beyond jurisdiction.—When, in the execution of a            
search-warrant at any place beyond the local jurisdiction of the Court which issued the same, any of the 
things for which search is made, are found, such things, together with the list of the same prepared under 
the provisions hereinafter contained, shall be immediately taken before the Court issuing the warrant, 
unless such place is nearer to the Magistrate having jurisdiction therein than to such Court, in which case 
the list and things shall be immediately taken before such Magistrate; and, unless there be good cause to 
the contrary, such Magistrate shall make an order authorising them to be taken to such Court. 
 
D.—Miscellaneous 
102. Power of police officer to seize certain property.—(1) Any police officer may seize any 
property which may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or which may be found under 
circumstances which create suspicion of the commission of any offence. 
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of a police station, shall forthwith report 
the seizure to that officer. 

56 
 
1[(3) Every police officer acting under sub-section (1) shall forthwith report the seizure to the 
Magistrate having jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it cannot be conveniently 
transported to the Court, 2[or where there is difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the custody 
of such property, or where the continued retention of the property in police custody may not be 
considered necessary for the purpose of investigation,] he may give custody thereof to any person on his 
executing a  bond  undertaking  to produce the property before the Court as and when required and to give 
effect to the further orders of the Court as to the disposal of the same:] 
3[Provided that where the property seized under sub-section (1) is subject to speedy and natural decay 
and if the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown or absent and the value of such 
property is less than five hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under the orders of the 
Superintendent of Police and the provisions of sections 457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be 
practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale.] 
103. Magistrate may direct search in his presence.—Any Magistrate may direct a search to be 
made in his presence of any place for the search of which he is competent to issue a search-warrant. 
104. Power to impound document, etc., produced.—Any Court may, if it thinks fit, impound any 
document or thing produced before it under this Code. 
105. Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes.—(1) Where a Court in the territories to which 
this Code extends (hereafter in this section referred to as the said territories) desires that— 
(a) a summons to an accused person, or 
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or 
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing, or to 
produce it, or 
(d) a search-warrant, 
4[issued by it shall be served or executed at any place,— 
(i) within the local jurisdiction of a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories, 
it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate by post or otherwise, to the presiding officer of 
that Court to be served or executed; and where any summons referred to in clause (a) or clause (c) has 
been so served, the provisions of section 68 shall apply in relation to such summons as if the 
presiding officer of the Court to whom it is sent were a Magistrate in the said territories; 
(ii) in any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have been made by the 
Central Government with the Government of such country or place for service or execution of 
summons or warrant in relation to criminal matters (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
contracting State), it may send such summons or warrant in duplicate in such form, directed to such 
Court, Judge or Magistrate, and send to such authority for transmission, as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify in this behalf.] 
(2) Where a Court in the said territories has received for service or execution— 
(a) a summons to an accused person, or 
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or 
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing, or to 
produce it, or 
(d) a search-warrant, 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 10  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 13 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
3. Added by s. 13, ibid., (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 1988, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 25-5-1988). 

57 
 
2[issued by— 
(I) a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories; 
(II) a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State, 
it shall cause the same to be served or executed] as if it were a summons or warrant received by it from 
another Court in the said territories for service or execution within its local jurisdiction; and where— 
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed by sections 80 and 81, 
 (ii) a search-warrant has been executed, the things found in the search shall, so far as possible, be dealt 
with in accordance with the procedure prescribed by section 101: 
1[Provided that in a case where a summons or search-warrant received from a contracting  State has been 
executed, the documents or things produced or things found in the search shall be forwarded to the Court issuing the 
summons or search-warrant through such authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this 
behalf.] 
2[CHAPTER VIIA 
RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR 
ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY 
 
105A. Definitions.—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “contracting State” means any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements have 
been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country through a treaty or otherwise; 
(b) “identifying” includes establishment of a proof that the property was derived from, or used in, the 
commission of an offence; 
(c) “proceeds of crime” means any property derived or obtained directly or indirectly, by any person as a 
result of criminal activity (including crime involving currency transfers) or the value of any such property; 
(d) “property” means property and assets of every description whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or 
immovable, tangible or intangible and deeds and instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or 
assets derived or used in the commission of an offence and includes property obtained through proceeds of 
crime; 
(e) “tracing” means determining the nature, source, disposition, movement, title or ownership of property. 
105B. Assistance in securing transfer of persons.—(1) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal 
matter, desires that a warrant for arrest of any person to attend or produce a document or other thing issued by it 
shall be executed in any place in a contracting State, it shall send such warrant in duplicate in such form to such 
Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authority, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this 
behalf and that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the same to be executed. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, if, in the course of an investigation or any inquiry into an 
offence, an application is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer 
that the attendance of a person who is in any place in a contracting State is required in connection with such 
investigation or inquiry and the Court is satisfied that such attendance is so required, it shall issue a summons or 
warrant, in duplicate, against the said person to such Court, Judge or Magistrate, in such form as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, to cause the same to be served or executed. 
(3) Where a Court in India, in relation to a criminal matter, has received a warrant for arrest of any person 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1988, s. 2, (w.e.f. 25-5-1988). 
2. Ins. by Act 40 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-7-1994). 

58 
 
requiring him to attend or attend and produce a document or other thing in that Court or before any other 
investigating agency, issued by a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State, the same shall be executed as if it 
is the warrant received by it from another Court in India for execution within its local limits. 
(4) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant to sub-section (3) is a prisoner in India, the Court 
in India or the Central Government may impose such conditions as that Court or Government deems fit. 
(5) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) is a prisoner in a 
contracting State, the Court in India shall ensure that the conditions subject to which the prisoner is transferred to 
India are complied with and such prisoner shall be kept in such custody subject to such conditions as the Central 
Government may direct in writing. 
105C. Assistance in relation to orders of attachment or forfeiture of property.—(1) Where a 
Court in India has reasonable grounds to believe that any property obtained by any person is derived or 
obtained, directly or indirectly, by such person from the commission of an offence, it may make an order 
of attachment or forfeiture of such property, as it may deem fit under the provisions of sections 105D to 
105J (both inclusive). 
(2) Where the Court has made an order for attachment or forfeiture of any property under sub-section 
(1), and such property is suspected to be in a contracting State, the Court may issue a letter of request to a 
Court or an authority in the contracting State for execution of such order. 
(3) Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a Court or an authority in a 
contracting State requesting attachment or forfeiture of the property in India, derived or obtained, directly 
or indirectly, by any person from the commission of an offence committed in that contracting State, the 
Central Government may forward such letter of request to the Court, as it thinks fit, for execution in 
accordance with the provisions of sections 105D to 105J (both inclusive) or, as the case may be, any other 
law for the time being in force. 
105D. Identifying unlawfully acquired property.—(1) The Court shall, under sub-section (1), or on 
receipt of a letter of request under sub-section (3) of section 105C, direct any police officer not below the 
rank of Sub-Inspector of Police to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property. 
(2) The steps referred to in sub-section (1) may include any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect 
of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in any bank or public financial 
institutions or any other relevant matters. 
(3) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub-section (2) shall be carried out by an officer 
mentioned in sub-section (1) in accordance with such directions issued by the said Court in this behalf. 
105E. Seizure or attachment of property.—(1) Where any officer conducting an inquiry or 
investigation under section 105D has a reason to believe that any property in relation to which such 
inquiry or investigation is being conducted is likely to be concealed transferred or dealt with in any 
manner which will result in disposal of such property, he may make an order for seizing such property 
and where it is not practicable to seize such property, he may make an order of attachment directing that 
such property shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the prior permission of the 
officer making such order, and a copy of such order shall be served on the person concerned. 
(2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall have no effect unless the said order is confirmed by an 
order of the said Court, within a period of thirty days of its being made. 
105F. Management of properties seized or forfeited under this Chapter.—(1) The Court may 
appoint the District Magistrate of the area where the property is situated, or any other officer that may be 
nominated by the District Magistrate, to perform the functions of an Administrator of such property. 

59 
 
(2) The Administrator appointed under sub-section (1) shall receive and manage the property in 
relation to which the order has been made under sub-section (1) of section 105E or under section 105H in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by the Central Government. 
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to 
dispose of the property which is forfeited to the Central Government. 
105G. Notice of forfeiture of property.—(1) If as a result of the inquiry, investigation or survey 
under section 105D, the Court has reason to believe that all or any of such properties are proceeds of 
crime, it may serve a notice upon such person (hereinafter referred to as the person affected) calling upon 
him within a period of thirty days specified in the notice to indicate the source of income, earnings or 
assets, out of which or by means of which he has acquired such property, the evidence on which he relies 
and other relevant information and particulars, and to show cause why all or any of such properties, as the 
case may be, should not be declared to be proceeds of crime and forfeited to the Central Government. 
(2) Where a notice under sub-section (1) to any person specifies any property as being held on behalf 
of such person by any other person, a copy of the notice shall also be served upon such other person. 
105H. Forfeiture of property in certain cases.—(1) The Court may, after considering the 
explanation, if any, to the show-cause notice issued under section 105G and the material available 
before it and after giving to the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any 
property specified in the notice through any other person, to such other person also) a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties in question 
are proceeds of crime: 
Provided that if the person affected (and in a case where the person affected holds any property 
specified in the notice through any other person such other person also) does not appear before the 
Court or represent his case before it within a period of thirty days specified in the show-cause notice, 
the Court may proceed to record a finding under this sub-section ex parte on the basis of evidence 
available before it. 
(2) Where the Court is satisfied that some of the properties referred to in the show-cause notice 
are proceeds of crime but it is not possible to identify specifically such properties, then, it shall be 
lawful for the Court to specify the properties which, to the best of its judgment, are proceeds of crime 
and record a finding accordingly under sub-section (1). 
(3) Where the Court records a finding under this section to the effect that any property is 
proceeds of crime, such property shall stand forfeited to the Central Government free from all 
encumbrances. 
(4) Where any shares in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government under this section, 
then, the company shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) 
or the articles of association of the company, forthwith register the Central Government as the 
transferee of such shares. 
105-I. Fine in lieu of forfeiture.—(1) Where the Court makes a declaration that any property 
stands forfeited to the Central Government under section 105H and it is a case where the source of 
only a part of such property has not been proved to the satisfaction of the Court, it shall make an 
order giving an option to the person affected to pay, in lieu of forfeiture, a fine equal to the market 
value of such part. 
(2) Before making an order imposing a fine under sub-section (1), the person affected shall be 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(3) Where the person affected pays the fine due under sub-section (1), within such time as may 
be allowed in that behalf, the Court may, by order, revoke the declaration of forfeiture under section 
105H and thereupon such property shall stand released. 

60 
 
105J. Certain transfers to be null and void.—Where after the making of an order under sub-
section (1) of section 105E or the issue of a notice under section 105G, any property referred to in the 
said order or notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever such transfers shall, for the purposes of 
the proceedings under this Chapter, be ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited to the 
Central Government under section 105H, then, the transfer of such property shall be deemed to be 
null and void. 
105K. Procedure in respect of letter of request.—Every letter of request, summons or warrant, 
received by the Central Government from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be 
transmitted to a contracting State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as 
the case may be, sent to the concerned Court in India in such form and in such manner as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 
105L. Application of this Chapter.—The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct that the application of this Chapter in relation to a contracting State with 
which reciprocal arrangements have been made, shall be subject to such conditions, exceptions or 
qualifications as are specified in the said notification.] 
CHAPTER VIII 
SECURITY FOR KEEPING THE PEACE AND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR 
106. Security for keeping the peace on conviction.—(1) When a Court of Session or Court of a Magistrate of 
the first class convicts a person of any of the offences specified in sub-section (2) or of abetting any such offence 
and is of opinion that it is necessary to take security from such person for keeping the peace, the Court may, at the 
time of passing sentence on such person, order him to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace 
for such period, not exceeding three years, as it thinks fit. 
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are— 
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VIII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), other than an offence 
punishable under section 153A or section 153B or section 154 thereof; 
(b) any offence which consists of, or includes, assault or using criminal force or committing mischief; 
(c) any offence of criminal intimidation; 
(d) any other offence which caused, or was intended or known to be likely to cause, a breach of the peace. 
(3) If the conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, the bond so executed shall become void. 
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by a Court when exercising its 
powers of revision. 
107. Security for keeping the peace in other cases.—(1) When an Executive Magistrate receives information 
that any person is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any wrongful act 
that may probably occasion a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity and is of opinion that there is 
sufficient ground for proceeding, he may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause 
why he should not be ordered to execute a bond 1[with or without sureties,] for keeping the peace for such period, 
not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit. 
(2) Proceedings under this section may be taken before any Executive Magistrate when either the place where 
the breach of the peace or disturbance is apprehended is within his local jurisdiction or there is within such 
jurisdiction a person who is likely to commit a breach of the peace or disturb the public tranquillity or to do any 
wrongful act as aforesaid beyond such jurisdiction. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

61 
 
108. Security for good behaviour from persons disseminating seditious matters.—(1) When 1[an Executive 
Magistrate]  receives information that there is within his local jurisdiction any person who, within or without such 
jurisdiction,— 
(i) either orally or in writing or in any other manner, intentionally disseminates or attempts to disseminate 
or abets the dissemination of,— 
(a) any matter the publication of which is punishable under section 124A or section 153A or section 
153B  or section 295A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or 
(b) any matter concerning a Judge acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties 
which amounts to criminal intimidation or defamation under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
(ii) makes, produces, publishes or keeps for sale, imports, exports, conveys, sells, lets to hire,                   
distributes, publicly exhibits or in any other manner puts into circulation any obscene matter such as is referred 
to in section 292 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
and the Magistrate is of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate may, in the manner 
hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, with or 
without sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit. 
 (2) No proceedings shall be taken under this section against the editor, proprietor, printer or publisher of any 
publication registered under, and edited, printed and published in conformity with, the rules laid down in the Press 
and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (25 of 1867), with reference to any matter contained in such publication except 
by the order or under the authority of the State Government or some officer empowered by the State Government in 
this behalf. 
109. Security for good behaviour from suspected persons.—When 2[an Executive Magistrate]  receives 
information that there is within his local jurisdiction a person taking precautions to conceal his presence and that 
there is reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in 
the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a bond, 
with or without sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding one year, as the Magistrate thinks fit. 
110. Security for good behaviour from habitual offenders.—When 2[an Executive Magistrate]  receives 
information that there is within his local jurisdiction a person who—  
(a) is by habit a robber, house-breaker, thief, or forger, or 
(b) is by habit a receiver of stolen property knowing the same to have been stolen, or 
(c) habitually protects or harbours thieves, or aids in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, or 
(d) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, the offence of kidnapping, 
abduction, extortion, cheating or mischief, or any offence punishable under Chapter XII of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), or under section 489A, section 489B, section 489C or section 489D of that Code, or 
(e) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of, offences, involving a breach of 
the peace, or 
(f) habitually commits, or attempts to commit, or abets the commission of— 
(i) any offence under one or more of the following Acts, namely:— 
(a)  the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940); 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 2, for “a Judicial Magistrate  of the first class” (w.e.f. 23-9-1980). 

62 
 
1[(b) the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973);] 
(c) the Employees’ Provident Fund 2[and Family Pension Fund] Act, 1952 (19 of 1952); 
(d) the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954); 
(e) the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955); 
(f) the Untouchability (Offences) Act, 1955 (22 of 1955); 
(g) the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962); 3*** 
4[(h) the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946); or] 
(ii) any offence punishable under any other law providing for the prevention of hoarding or 
profiteering or of adulteration of food or drugs or of corruption, or  
(g) is so desperate and dangerous to render his being at large without security hazardous to the community, 
such Magistrate may, in the manner hereinafter provided, require such person to show cause why he should not be 
ordered to execute a bond, with sureties, for his good behaviour for such period, not exceeding three years, as the 
Magistrate thinks fit. 
111. Order to be made.—When a Magistrate acting under section 107, section 108, section 109 or section 110, 
deems it necessary to require any person to show cause under such section, he shall make an order in writing, setting 
forth the substance of the information received, the amount of the bond to be executed, the term for which it is to be 
in force, and the number, character and class of sureties (if any) required. 
112. Procedure in respect of person present in Court.—If the person in respect of whom such order is made 
is present in Court, it shall be read over to him, or, if he so desires, the substance thereof shall be explained to him. 
113. Summons or warrant in case of person not so present.—If such person is not present in Court, the 
Magistrate shall issue a summons requiring him to appear, or, when such person is in custody, a warrant directing 
the officer in whose custody he is to bring him before the Court: 
Provided that whenever it appears to such Magistrate, upon the report of a police officer or upon other 
information (the substance of which report or information shall be recorded by the Magistrate), that there is reason 
to fear the commission of a breach of the peace, and that such breach of the peace cannot be prevented otherwise 
than by the immediate arrest of such person, the Magistrate may at any time issue a warrant for his arrest. 
114. Copy of order to accompany summons or warrant.—Every summons or warrant issued under section 
113 shall be accompanied by a copy of the order made under section 111, and such copy shall be delivered by the 
officer serving or executing such summons or warrant to the person served with, or arrested under, the same. 
115. Power to dispense with personal attendance.—The Magistrate may, if he sees sufficient cause, dispense 
with the personal attendance of any person called upon to show cause why he should not be ordered to execute a 
bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour and may permit him to appear by a pleader. 
116. Inquiry as to truth of information.—(1) When an order under section 111 has been read or explained 
under section 112 to a person present in Court, or when any person appears or is brought before a Magistrate in 
compliance with, or in execution of, a summons or warrant, issued under section 113, the Magistrate shall proceed 
to inquire into the truth of the information upon which action has been taken, and to take such further evidence as 
may appear necessary. 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for item (b) (w.e.f. 10-1-1975). 
3. Ins. by s. 3 and the Second Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 10-1-1975). 
3. The word “or” omitted by Act 25 of 2005, s. 14 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

63 
 
(2) Such inquiry shall be made, as nearly as may be practicable, in the manner hereinafter prescribed for 
conducting trial and recording evidence in summons-cases. 
(3) After the commencement, and before the completion, of the inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate, 
if he considers that immediate measures are necessary for the prevention of a breach of the peace or disturbance 
of the public tranquillity or the commission of any offence or for the public safety, may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, direct the person in respect of whom the order under section 111 has been made to execute a 
bond, with or without sureties, for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour until the conclusion of the 
inquiry, and may detain him in custody until such bond is executed or, in default of execution, until the inquiry is 
concluded: 
Provided that— 
(a) no person against whom proceedings are not being taken under section 108, section 109, or section 110 
shall be directed to execute a bond for maintaining good behaviour; 
(b) the conditions of such bond, whether as to the amount thereof or as to the provision of sureties or the 
number thereof or the pecuniary extent of their liability, shall not be more onerous than those specified in the 
order under section 111. 
(4) For the purposes of this section the fact that a person is an habitual offender or is so desperate and dangerous 
as to render his being at large without security hazardous to the community may be proved by evidence of general 
repute or otherwise. 
(5) Where two or more persons have been associated together in the matter under inquiry, they may be dealt 
within the same or separate inquiries as the Magistrate shall think just. 
(6) The inquiry under this section shall be completed within a period of six months from the date of its 
commencement, and if such inquiry is not so completed, the proceedings under this Chapter shall, on the expiry of 
the said period, stand terminated unless, for special reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise 
directs: 
Provided that where any person has been kept in detention pending such inquiry, the proceeding against that 
person, unless terminated earlier, shall stand terminated on the expiry of a period of six months of such detention. 
(7) Where any direction is made under sub-section (6) permitting the continuance of proceedings the Sessions 
Judge may, on an application made to him by the aggrieved party, vacate such direction if he is satisfied that it was 
not based on any special reason or was perverse. 
117. Order to give security.—If, upon such inquiry, it is proved that it is necessary for keeping the peace or 
maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made should 
execute a bond, with or without sureties, the Magistrate shall make an order accordingly: 
Provided that— 
(a) no person shall be ordered to give security of a nature different from, or of an amount larger than, or for 
a period longer than, that specified in the order made under section 111; 
(b) the amount of every bond shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not 
be excessive; 
(c) when the person in respect of whom the inquiry is made is a minor, the bond shall be executed only by 
his sureties. 
118. Discharge of person informed against.—If, on an inquiry under section 116, it is not proved that it is 
necessary for keeping the peace or maintaining good behaviour, as the case may be, that the person in respect of 
whom the inquiry is made, should execute a bond, the Magistrate shall make an entry on the record to that effect, 
and if such person is in custody only for the purposes of the inquiry, shall release him, or, if such person is not in 
custody, shall discharge him. 

64 
 
119. Commencement of period for which security is required.—(1) If any person, in respect of whom an 
order requiring security is made under section 106 or section 117, is at the time such order is made, sentenced to, or 
undergoing a sentence of, imprisonment, the period for which such security is required shall commence on the 
expiration of such sentence. 
(2) In other cases such period shall commence on the date of such order unless the Magistrate, for sufficient 
reason, fixes a later date. 
120. Contents of bond.—The bond to be executed by any such person shall bind him to keep the peace or to be 
of good behaviour, as the case may be, and in the latter case the commission or attempt to commit, or the abetment 
of, any offence punishable with imprisonment, wherever it may be committed, is a breach of the bond. 
121. Power to reject sureties.—(1) A Magistrate may refuse to accept any surety offered, or may reject any 
surety previously accepted by him or his predecessor under this Chapter on the ground that such surety is an unfit 
person for the purposes of the bond: 
Provided that, before so refusing to accept or rejecting any such surety, he shall either himself hold an inquiry 
on oath into the fitness of the surety, or cause such inquiry to be held and a report to be made thereon by a 
Magistrate subordinate to him. 
(2) Such Magistrate shall, before holding the inquiry, give reasonable notice to the surety and to the person by 
whom the surety was offered and shall, in making the inquiry, record the substance of the evidence adduced before 
him. 
(3) If the Magistrate is satisfied, after considering the evidence so adduced either before him or before a 
Magistrate deputed under sub-section (1), and the report of such Magistrate (if any), that the surety is an unfit person 
for the purposes of the bond, he shall make an order refusing to accept or rejecting, as the case may be, such surety 
and recording his reasons for so doing: 
Provided that, before making an order rejecting any surety who has previously been accepted, the Magistrate 
shall issue his summons or warrant, as he thinks fit, and cause the person for whom the surety is bound to appear or 
to be brought before him. 
122. Imprisonment in default of security.—(1) (a) If any person ordered to give security under section 106 or 
section 117 does not give such security on or before the date on which the period for which such security is to be 
given commences, he shall, except in the case next hereinafter mentioned, be committed to prison, or, if he is 
already in prison, be detained in prison until such period expires or until within such period he gives the security to 
the Court or Magistrate who made the order requiring it. 
(b) If any person after having executed a 1[bond, with or without sureties] without sureties for keeping the peace 
in pursuance of an order of a Magistrate under section 117, is proved, to the satisfaction of such Magistrate or his 
successor-in-office, to have committed breach of the bond, such Magistrate or successor-in-office may, after 
recording the grounds of such proof, order that the person be arrested and detained in prison until the expiry of the 
period of the bond and such order shall be without prejudice to any other punishment or forfeiture to which the said 
person may be liable in accordance with law. 
(2) When such person has been ordered by a Magistrate to give security for a period exceeding one year, such 
Magistrate shall, if such person does not give such security as aforesaid, issue a warrant directing him to be detained 
in prison pending the orders of the Sessions Judge and the proceedings shall be laid, as soon as conveniently may be, 
before such Court. 
(3) Such Court, after examining such proceedings and requiring from the Magistrate any further information or 
evidence which it thinks necessary, and after giving the concerned person a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
may pass such order on the case as it thinks fit: 
Provided that the period (if any) for which any person is imprisoned for failure to give security shall not exceed 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 15, for “bond without sureties” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

65 
 
three years. 
(4) If security has been required in the course of the same proceeding from two or more persons in respect                 
of any one of whom the proceedings are referred to the Sessions Judge under sub-section (2) such reference shall 
also include the case of any other of such persons who has been order to give security, and the provisions of                  
sub-sections (2) and (3) shall, in that event, apply to the case of such other person also, except that the period (if 
any) for which he may be imprisoned, shall not exceed the period for which he was ordered to give security. 
(5) A Sessions Judge may in his discretion transfer any proceedings laid before him under sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (4) to an Additional Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge and upon such transfer, such Additional 
Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge may exercise the powers of a Sessions Judge under this section in 
respect of such proceedings. 
(6) If the security is tendered to the officer in charge of the jail, he shall forthwith refer the matter to the Court 
or Magistrate who made the order, and shall await the orders of such Court or Magistrate. 
(7) Imprisonment for failure to give security for keeping the peace shall be simple. 
(8) Imprisonment for failure to give security for good behaviour shall, where the proceedings have been taken 
under section 108, be simple, and, where the proceedings have been taken under section 109 or section 110, be 
rigorous or simple as the Court or Magistrate in each case directs. 
123. Power to release persons imprisoned for failing to give security.—(1) Whenever 1[the District 
Magistrate in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate in any other case] is of opinion that any person imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter 
may be released without hazard to the community or to any other person, he may order such person to be 
discharged. 
(2) Whenever any person has been imprisoned for failing to give security under this Chapter, the High Court or 
Court of Session, or, where the order was made by any other Court, 2[District Magistrate, in the case of an order 
passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other case], may make 
an order reducing the amount of the security or the number of sureties or the time for which security has been 
required. 
(3) An order under sub-section (1) may direct the discharge of such person either without conditions or upon 
any conditions which such person accepts: 
Provided that any condition imposed shall cease to be operative when the period for which such person was 
ordered to give security has expired. 
(4) The State Government may prescribe the conditions upon which a conditional discharge may be made. 
(5) If any condition upon which any person has been discharged is, in the opinion of 2[District Magistrate, in the 
case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other 
case] by whom the order of discharge was made or of his successor, not fulfilled, he may cancel the same. 
(6) When a conditional order of discharge has been cancelled under sub-section (5), such person may be 
arrested by any police officer without warrant, and shall thereupon be produced before the 3[District Magistrate, in 
the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any 
other case]. 
(7) Unless such person gives security in accordance with the terms of the original order for the unexpired 
portion of the term for which he was in the first instance committed  or ordered to be detained (such portion being 
deemed to be a period equal to the period between the date of the breach of the conditions of discharge and the date 
on which, except for such conditional discharge, he would have been entitled to release), 1[District Magistrate, in the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 12, for “the Chief Judicial Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “Chief Judicial Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “Chief Judicial Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

66 
 
case of an order  passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief Judicial Magistrate in any other 
case] may remand such person to prison to undergo such unexpired portion. 
(8) A person remanded to prison under sub-section (7) shall, subject to the provisions of section 122, be 
released at any time on giving security in accordance with the terms of the original order for the unexpired portion 
aforesaid to the Court or Magistrate by whom such order was made, or to its or his successor. 
(9) The High Court or Court of Session may at any time, for sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing, cancel 
any bond for keeping the peace or for good behaviour executed under this Chapter by any order made by it, and 
1[District Magistrate, in the case of an order passed by an Executive Magistrate under section 117, or the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate in any other case] may make such cancellation where such bond was executed under his order or 
under the order of any other Court in his district. 
(10) Any surety for the peaceable conduct or good behaviour of another person ordered to execute a bond under 
this Chapter may at any time apply to the Court making such order to cancel the bond and on such application being 
made, the Court shall issue a summons or warrant, as it thinks fit, requiring the person for whom such surety is bond 
appear or to be brought before it. 
124. Security for unexpired period of bond.—(1) When a person for whose appearance a summons or warrant 
has been issued under the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 121 or under sub-section (10) of section 123, appears 
or is brought before the Magistrate or Court, the Magistrate or Court shall cancel the bond executed by such person 
and shall order such person to give, for the unexpired portion of the term of such bond, fresh security of the same 
description as the original security. 
(2) Every such order shall, for the purposes of sections 120 to 123 (both inclusive) be deemed to be an order 
made under section 106 or section 117, as the case may be. 
CHAPTER IX 
ORDER FOR MAINTENANCE OF WIVES, CHILDREN AND PARENTS 
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents.—(1) If any person having sufficient means 
neglects or refuses to maintain— 
(a) his wife, unable to maintain herself, or 
(b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, whether married or not, unable to maintain itself, or 
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married daughter) who has attained majority, where such 
child is, by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury unable to maintain itself, or 
(d) his father or mother, unable to maintain himself or herself, 
a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly 
allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, at such monthly rate 1*** as such 
Magistrate thinks fit and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct: 
Provided that the Magistrate may order the father of a minor female child referred to in clause (b) to make such 
allowance, until she attains her majority, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor female child, if 
married, is not possessed of sufficient means: 
2[Provided further that the Magistrate may, during the pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly allowance 
for the maintenance under this sub-section, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the interim 
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the Magistrate 
considers reasonable, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct: 
                                                 
1. Certain words omitted by Act 50 of  2001, s. 2  (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 

67 
 
Provided also that an application for the monthly allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of 
proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of the 
service of notice of the application to such person.] 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter,— 
(a) “minor” means a person who, under the provisions of the Indian Majority Act, 1875 (9 of 1875) is 
deemed not to have attained his majority; 
(b) “wife” includes a woman who has been divorced by, or has obtained a divorce from, her husband and 
has not remarried. 
1[(2) Any such allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding shall be 
payable from the date of the order, or, if so ordered, from the date of the application for maintenance or interim 
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be.] 
(3) If any person so ordered fails without sufficient cause to comply with the order, any such Magistrate may, for 
every breach of the order, issue a warrant for levying the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines, and 
may sentence such person, for the whole or any part of each month’s 2[allowance for the maintenance or the interim 
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,] remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, 
to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or until payment if sooner made: 
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for the recovery of any amount due under this section unless application 
be made to the Court to levy such amount within a period of one year from the date on which it became due: 
Provided further that if such person offers to maintain his wife on condition of her living with him, and she 
refuses to live with him, such Magistrate may consider any grounds of refusal stated by her, and may make an order 
under this section notwithstanding such offer, if he is satisfied that there is just ground for so doing. 
Explanation.—If a husband has contracted marriage with another woman or keeps a mistress, it shall be 
considered to be just ground for his wife’s refusal to live with him. 
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an 3[allowance for the maintenance or the interim maintenance and 
expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,] from her husband under this section if she is living in adultery, or if, 
without any sufficient reason, she refuses to live with her husband, or if they are living separately by mutual 
consent. 
(5) On proof that any wife in whose favour an order has been made under this section in living in adultery,  or 
that without sufficient reason she refuses to live with her husband, or that they are living separately by mutual 
consent. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Madhya Pradesh 
Amendment of Section 125.— In sub-section (1) of section 125 of the Principal Act, for the words “five 
hundred rupees” the words “three thousand rupees” shall be substituted 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act, 10 of 1998, s. 3.] 
Madhya Pradesh 
Amendment of Section 125.— In section 125 of the principal Act,— 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 2, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “allowance” (w.e.f. 24-9-2001)  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “allowance” (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 

68 
 
(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be substituted, namely:— 
“Order for maintenance of wives, children, parents and grand parents.” 
(ii) In sub-section (1), — 
(a) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(e) his grand father, grand mother unable to maintain himself or her self.”; 
(b) In the existing para, for the words “a Magistrate of the first class may, upon proof of such neglect or 
refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife or such child, father or 
mother at such monthly rate not exceeding three thousand rupees in the whole, as such Magistrate thinks fit, and 
to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate  may from time to time direct”, the words “a Magistrate of the 
first class may upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order such person to make a monthly allowance for the 
maintenance of his wife or such child, father, mother, grand father, grand mother at such monthly rate, as such 
Magistrate thinks fit, and to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from time to time direct” shall be 
substituted; 
(c) After the existing first proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
“Provided further that the relatives in clause (e) shall only be entitled to monthly allowance for maintenance 
if their sons daughters are not alive and they are unable to maintain themselves.” 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 2004, s. 3.] 
West Bengal 
In Sub-section (1) of section 125 of the Principal Act, — 
(1) for the words “five hundred rupees”, the words “one thousand and five hundred rupees” shall be 
substituted; 
(2) after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted:— 
“Provided further that where in any proceeding under this section it appears to the Magistrate that 
the wife referred to in clause (a) or the minor child referred to in clause (b) or the child (not being a 
married daughter) referred to in clause (c) or the father or the mother referred to in clause (d) is in 
need of immediate relief for her or its or his support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding, the 
Magistrate may, on the application of the wife or the minor child or the child (not being a married 
daughter) or the father or the mother, as the case may be, order the person against whom the allowance 
for maintenance is claimed, to pay to the petitioner, pending the conclusion of the proceeding, the 
expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such allowance as, having regard to 
the income of such person, it may seem to the Magistrate co be reasonable.”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act, 25 of 1992, s. 4.] 
West Bengal 
In sub-section (1) of section 125 of the principal Act, as amended by the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(West Bengal Amendment) Act, 1992, the words “not exceeding one thousand and five hundred rupees” 
the proviso shall be omitted. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 33 of 2001, s. 3.] 

69 
 
126.  Procedure.—(1) Proceedings under section 125 may be taken against any person in any district— 
(a) where he is, or  
(b) where he or his wife resides, or 
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate child. 
(2) All evidence in such proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the person against whom an order for 
payment of maintenance is proposed to be made, or, when his personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence 
of his pleader, and shall be recorded in the manner prescribed  for summons-cases:  
Provided that if the  Magistrate is  satisfied that the person against whom an order for payment of maintenance 
is proposed to be made is wilfully avoiding service, or wilfully neglecting to attend the Court, the Magistrate may  
proceed to hear and determine the case ex parte and any order so made may be set aside for good cause shown on an 
application made  within three months  from the date thereof subject to such terms including terms as to payment of 
costs to the opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and proper. 
(3) The Court in dealing with applications under section 125 shall have power to make such order as to costs as 
may be just. 
127. Alteration in allowance.—1[(1) On proof of a change in the circumstances of any person, receiving, under 
section 125 a monthly allowance for the maintenance or interim maintenance, or ordered under the same section to 
pay a monthly allowance for the maintenance, or interim maintenance, to his wife, child, father or mother, as the 
case may be, the Magistrate may make such alteration, as he thinks fit, in the allowance for the maintenance or the 
interim maintenance, as the case may be.] 
(2) Where it appears to the Magistrate that, in consequence of any decision of a competent Civil Court, any 
order made under section 125 should be cancelled or varied, he shall cancel the order or, as the case may be, vary 
the same accordingly. 
(3) Where any order has been made under section 125 in favour of a woman who has been divorced by, or has 
obtained a divorce from, her husband, the Magistrate shall, if he is satisfied that— 
(a) the woman has, after the date of such divorce, remarried, cancel such order as from the date of her 
remarriage; 
(b) the woman has been divorced by her husband and that she has received, whether before or after the date 
of the said order, the whole of the sum which, under any customary or personal law applicable to the parties, 
was payable on such divorce, cancel such order,—  
(i) in the case where such sum was paid before such order, from the date on which such order was 
made; 
(ii) in any other case, from the date of expiry of the period, if any, for which maintenance has been 
actually paid by the husband to the woman; 
(c) the woman has obtained a divorce from her husband and that she had voluntarily surrendered her rights 
to 2[maintenance or interim maintenance, as the case may be,] after her divorce, cancel the order from the date 
thereof.  
(4) At the time of making any decree for the recovery of any maintenance or dowry by any person, to whom a 
3[monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or any of them has been ordered] to be paid 
under section 125, the Civil Court shall take into account the sum which has been paid to, or recovered by, such 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 3, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
2. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 3, for “maintenance”  (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “monthly allowance has been ordered” (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 

70 
 
person 1[as monthly allowance for the maintenance and interim maintenance or  any of them, as the case may be, in 
pursuance of] the said order.  
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Madhya Pradesh 
Amendment of section 127.—In sub-section (1) of section 127 of the principal Act, for the words 
“father or mother”, the words “father, mother, grand father, grand mother” shall be substituted.  
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 2004, s. 4.] 
West Bengal  
In the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 127 of the principal Act, for the words “five hundred 
rupees”, the words “one thousand and five hundred rupees” shall be substituted.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 14 of 1995, s. 3.] 
West Bengal  
In Sub-section (1) of section 127 of the principal Act, the proviso shall be omitted. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 33 of 2001, s. 4.] 
128. Enforcement of order of maintenance.—A copy of the order of 2[maintenance or interim maintenance 
and expenses of proceedings, as the case may be,] shall be given without payment to the person in whose favour it is 
made, or to his guardian, if any, or to the person to 3[whom the allowance for the maintenance or the allowance for 
the interim maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,] is to be paid; and such order may be 
enforced by any Magistrate in any place where the person against whom it is made may be, on  such Magistrate 
being satisfied as to the  identity of the parties and the non-payment of the 4[allowance, or as the case may be, 
expenses, due].    
CHAPTER X 
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER AND TRANQUILLITY 
A.—Unlawful assemblies 
129. Dispersal of assembly by use of civil force.—(1) Any Executive Magistrate or officer in charge of a 
police station or, in the absence of such officer in charge, any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector, 
may command any unlawful assembly, or any assembly of five or more persons likely to cause a disturbance of the 
public peace, to disperse; and it shall thereupon be the duty of the members of such assembly to disperse 
accordingly. 
(2) If, upon being so commanded, any such assembly does not disperse, or if, without being so commanded, it 
conducts itself in such a manner as to show a determination not to disperse, any Executive Magistrate or police 
officer referred to in sub-section (1), may proceed to disperse such assembly by force, and may require the 
assistance of any male person, not being an officer or member of the armed forces and acting as such, for the 
purpose of dispersing such assembly, and, if necessary, arresting and confining the persons who form part of it, in 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 50 of 2001, s. 3, for “monthly allowance in pursuance of” (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “maintenance”  (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “whom the allowance”  (w.e.f. 24-9-2001).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “allowance due”  (w.e.f. 24-9-2001). 
 

71 
 
order to disperse such assembly or that they may be punished according to law. 
130. Use of armed forces to disperse assembly.—(1) If any such assembly cannot be otherwise dispersed, and 
if it is necessary for the public security that it should be dispersed, the Executive Magistrate of the highest rank who 
is present may cause it to be dispersed by the armed forces. 
(2) Such Magistrate may require any officer in command of any group of persons belonging to the armed forces 
to disperse the assembly with the help of the armed forces under his command, and to arrest and confine such 
persons forming part of it as the Magistrate may direct, or as it may be necessary to arrest and confine in order to 
disperse the assembly or to have them punished according to law. 
(3) Every such officer of the armed forces shall obey such requisition in such manner as he thinks fit, but in so 
doing he shall use as little force, and do as little injury to person and property, as may be consistent with dispersing 
the assembly and arresting and detaining such persons. 
131. Power of certain armed force officers to disperse assembly.—When the public security is manifestly 
endangered by any such assembly and no Executive Magistrate can be communicated with, any commissioned or 
gazetted officer of the armed forces may disperse such assembly with the help of the armed forces under his 
command, and may arrest and confine any persons forming part of it, in order to disperse such assembly or that they 
may be punished according to law; but if, while he is acting under this section, it becomes practicable for him to 
communicate with an Executive Magistrate, he shall do so, and shall thenceforward obey the instructions of the 
Magistrate, as to whether he shall or shall not continue such action. 
132. Protection against prosecution for acts done under preceding sections.—(1) No prosecution against 
any person for any act purporting to be done under section 129, section 130 or section 131 shall be instituted in any 
Criminal Court except— 
(a) with the sanction of the Central Government where such person is an officer or member of the armed 
forces; 
(b) with the sanction of the State Government in any other case. 
(2) (a) No Executive Magistrate or police officer acting under any of the said sections in good faith; 
(b) no person doing any act in good faith in compliance with a requisition under section 129 or section 130; 
(c) no officer of the armed forces acting under section 131 in good faith; 
(d) no member of the armed forces doing any act in obedience to any order which he was bound to obey, 
shall be deemed to have thereby committed an offence. 
(3) In this section and in the preceding sections of this Chapter,— 
(a) the expression “armed forces” means the military, naval and air forces, operating as land forces and 
includes any other armed forces of the Union so operating; 
(b) “officer”, in relation to the armed forces, means a person commissioned, gazetted or in pay as an officer 
of the armed forces and includes a junior commissioned officer, a warrant officer, a petty officer, a non-
commissioned officer and a non-gazetted officer; 
(c) “member”, in relation to the armed forces, means a person in the armed forces other than an officer. 

72 
 
B.—Public nuisances 
133. Conditional order for removal of nuisance.—(1) Whenever a District Magistrate or a Sub-divisional 
Magistrate or any other  Executive  Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government, on 
receiving the report of a police officer or other information and on taking such evidence (if any) as he thinks fit, 
considers— 
(a) that any unlawful obstruction or nuisance should be removed from any public place or from any way, 
river or channel which is or may be lawfully used by the public; or 
(b) that the conduct of any trade or occupation, or the keeping of any goods or merchandise, is injurious to 
the health or physical comfort of the community, and that in consequence such trade or occupation should be 
prohibited or regulated or such goods or merchandise should be removed or the keeping thereof regulated; or 
(c) that the construction of any building, or, the disposal of any substance, as is likely to occasion 
configuration or explosion, should be prevented or stopped; or 
(d) that any building, tent or structure, or any tree is in such a condition that it is likely to fall and thereby 
cause injury to persons living or carrying on business in the neighbourhood or passing by, and that in 
consequence the removal, repair or support of such building, tent or structure, or the removal or support of such 
tree, is necessary; or 
(e) that any tank, well or excavation adjacent to any such way or public place should be fenced in such  
manner as to prevent danger arising to the public; or 
(f) that any dangerous animal should be destroyed, confined or otherwise disposed of, 
such Magistrate may make a conditional order requiring the person causing such obstruction or nuisance, or carrying 
on such trade or occupation, or keeping any such goods or merchandise, or owning, possessing or controlling such 
building, tent, structure, substance, tank, well or excavation, or owning or possessing such animal or tree, within a 
time to be fixed in the order— 
(i) to remove such obstruction or nuisance; or 
(ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or regulate in such manner as may be directed, such trade or 
occupation, or to remove such goods or merchandise, or to regulate the keeping thereof in such manner as may 
be directed; or 
(iii) to prevent or stop the construction of such building, or to alter the disposal of such substance; or 
(iv) to remove, repair or support such building, tent or structure, or to remove or support such trees; or 
(v) to fence such tank, well or excavation; or 
(vi) to destroy, confine or dispose of such dangerous animal in the manner provided in the said order, 
or, if he objects so to do, to appear before himself or some other Executive Magistrate subordinate to him at a time 
and place to be fixed by the order, and show cause, in the manner hereinafter provided, why the order should not be 
made absolute. 
(2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this section shall be called in question in any Civil Court. 
Explanation.—A “public place” includes also property belonging to the State, camping grounds and grounds 
left unoccupied for sanitary or recreative purposes. 
134. Service or notification of order.—(1) The order shall, if practicable, be served on the person against 
whom it is made, in the manner herein provided for service of a summons. 

73 
 
(2) If such order cannot be so served, it shall be notified by proclamation, published in such manner as the State 
Government may, by rules, direct, and a copy thereof shall be struck up at such place or places as may be fittest for 
conveying the information to such person. 
135. Person to whom order is addressed to obey or show cause.—The person against whom such order is 
made shall— 
(a) perform, within the time and in the manner specified in the order, the act directed thereby; or 
(b) appear in accordance with such order and show cause against the same. 
136. Consequences of his failing to do so.—If such person does not perform such act or appear and show 
cause, he shall be liable to the penalty prescribed in that behalf in section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
and the order shall be made absolute. 
137. Procedure where existence of public right is denied.—(1) Where an order is made under section 133 for 
the purpose of preventing obstruction, nuisance or danger to the public in the use of any way, river, channel or place, 
the Magistrate shall, on the appearance before him of the person against whom the order was made, question him as 
to whether he denies the existence of  any public right in respect of the way, river, channel or place, and if he does 
so, the Magistrate shall, before proceeding under section 138, inquire into the matter.  
(2) If in such inquiry the Magistrate finds that there is any reliable evidence in support of such denial, he shall 
stay the proceedings until the matter of the existence of such right has been decided by a competent Court; and, if he 
finds that there is no such evidence, he shall proceed as laid down in section 138. 
(3) A person who has, on being questioned by the Magistrate under sub-section (1), failed to deny the existence 
of a public right of the nature therein referred to, or who, having made such denial, has failed to adduce reliable 
evidence in support thereof, shall not in the subsequent proceedings be permitted to make any such denial. 
138. Procedure where he appears to show cause.—(1) If the person against whom an order under section 133 
is made appears and shows cause against the order, the Magistrate shall take evidence in the matter as in a 
summons-case. 
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that the order, either as originally made or subject to such modification as he 
considers necessary, is reasonable and proper, the order shall be made absolute without modification or, as the case 
may be, with such modification. 
(3) If the Magistrate is not so satisfied, no further proceedings shall be taken in the case. 
139. Power of Magistrate to direct local investigation and examination of an expert.—The Magistrate may, 
for the purposes of an inquiry under section 137 or section 138— 
(a) direct a local investigation to be made by such person as he thinks fit; or 
(b) summon and examine an expert. 
140. Power of Magistrate to furnish written instructions, etc.—(1) Where the Magistrate directs a local 
investigation by any person under section 139, the Magistrate may— 
(a) furnish such person with such written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance; 
(b) declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the local investigation shall be paid. 
(2) The report of such person may be read as evidence in the case. 
(3) Where the Magistrate summons and examines an expert under section 139, the Magistrate may direct by 
whom the costs of such summoning and examination shall be paid. 
141. Procedure on order being made absolute and consequences of disobedience.—(1) When an order has 
been made absolute under section 136 or section 138,  the Magistrate shall give notice of the same to the person 

74 
 
against whom the order was made, and shall further require him to perform the act directed by the order within a 
time to be fixed in the notice, and inform him that, in case of disobedience, he will be liable to the penalty provided 
by section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(2) If such act is not performed within the time fixed, the Magistrate may cause it to be performed, and may 
recover the costs of performing it, either by the sale of any building, goods or other property removed by his order, 
or by the  distress and sale of any other movable property of such person within or without such Magistrate’s local 
jurisdiction, and if such other property is without such jurisdiction, the order shall authorise its attachment and sale 
when endorsed by the Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the property to be attached is found. 
(3) No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith under this section. 
142. Injunction pending inquiry.—(1) If a Magistrate making an order under section 133 considers that 
immediate measures should be taken to prevent imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public, he may 
issue such an injunction to the person against whom the order was made, as is required to obviate or prevent 
such danger or injury pending the determination of the matter.  
(2)  In default of such person forthwith obeying such injunction, the Magistrate may himself use, or cause 
to be used, such means as he thinks fit to obviate such danger or to prevent such injury. 
(3)  No suit shall lie in respect of anything done in good faith by a Magistrate under this section. 
143. Magistrate may prohibit repetition or continuance of public nuisance.—A District Magistrate or 
Sub-divisional Magistrate, or any other Executive Magistrate empowered by the State Government or the 
District Magistrate in this behalf, may order any person not to repeat or continue a public nuisance, as defined 
in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or any special or local law.  
 
C.—Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger 
144. Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger.—(1) In cases where, in 
the opinion of a District Magistrate, a Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate specially 
empowered  by the State Government in this behalf, there is sufficient ground for proceeding under this section 
and immediate prevention  or speedy remedy is desirable, such Magistrate may, by a written order stating the 
material facts of the case and served in the manner provided by section 134, direct any person to abstain from a 
certain act or to take certain order with respect to certain property in his possession or under his management, 
if such Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to prevent, or tends to prevent, obstruction, annoyance 
or injury to any person lawfully employed, or danger to human life, health or safety or a disturbance of the 
public tranquillity, or a riot, or an affray.  
(2) An order under this section may, in cases of emergency or in cases where the circumstances do not 
admit of the serving in due time of a notice upon the person against whom the order is directed, be passed ex 
parte. 
(3) An order under this section may be directed to a particular individual, or to persons residing in a 
particular place or area, or to the public generally when frequenting or visiting a particular place or area.  
(4) No order under this section shall remain in force for more than two months from the making thereof: 
Provided that, if the State Government considers it necessary so to do for preventing danger to human life, 
health or safety or for preventing a riot or any affray, it may, by notification, direct that an order made by a 
Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such further period not exceeding six months from the 
date on which the order made by the Magistrate would have, but for such order, expired, as it may specify in 
the said notification. 
(5) Any Magistrate may, either on his own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, rescind 

75 
 
or alter any order made under this section, by himself or any Magistrate subordinate to him or by his 
predecessor-in-office. 
(6) The State Government may, either on its own motion or on the application of any person aggrieved, 
rescind or alter any order made by it under the proviso to sub-section (4). 
(7) Where an application under sub-section (5) or sub-section (6) is received, the Magistrate, or the State 
Government, as the case may be, shall afford to the applicant an early opportunity of appearing before him or 
it, either in person or by pleader and showing cause against the order; and if the Magistrate or the State 
Government, as the case may be, rejects the application wholly or in part, he or it shall record in writing the 
reasons for so doing. 
1[144A. Power to prohibit carrying arms in procession or mass drill or mass training with 
arms.—(1) The District Magistrate may, whenever he considers it necessary so to do for the 
preservation of public peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public order, by public notice 
or by order, prohibit in any area within the local limits of his jurisdiction, the carrying of arms in any 
procession or the organising or holding of, or taking part in, any mass drill or mass training with 
arms in any public place. 
(2) A public notice issued or an order made under this section may be directed to a particular 
person or to persons belonging to any community, party or organisation. 
(3) No public notice issued or an order made under this section shall remain in force for more 
than three months from the date on which it is issued or made. 
(4) The State Government may, if it considers necessary so to do for the preservation of public 
peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public order, by notification, direct that a public 
notice issued or order made by the District Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for 
such further period not exceeding six months from the date on which such public notice or order was 
issued or made by the District Magistrate would have, but for such direction, expired, as it may 
specify in the said notification. 
(5) The State Government may, subject to such control and directions as it may deem fit to 
impose, by general or special order, delegate its powers under sub-section (4) to the District 
Magistrate. 
Explanation.—The word “arms” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 153AA of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] 
D.—Disputes as to immovable property 
145. Procedure where dispute concerning land or water is likely to cause breach of peace.—
(1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is satisfied from a report of a police officer or upon other 
information that a dispute likely to cause a breach of the peace exists concerning any land or water or 
the boundaries thereof, within his local jurisdiction, he shall make an order in writing, stating the 
grounds of his being so satisfied, and requiring the parties concerned in such dispute to attend his 
Court in person or by pleader, on a specified date and time, and to put in written statements of their 
respective claims as respects the fact of actual possession of the subject of dispute. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, the expression “land or water” includes buildings, markets, 
fisheries, crops or other produce of land, and the rents or profits of any such property. 
(3) A copy of the order shall be served in the manner provided by this Code for the service of a 
summons upon such person or persons as the Magistrate may direct, and at least one copy shall be 
published by being affixed to some conspicuous place at or near the subject of dispute. 
(4) The Magistrate  shall  then, without reference to the merits or the claims of any of the parties 
to a right to possess the subject of dispute, persue the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive 
all such evidence as may be produced by them, take such further evidence, if any, as he thinks  
necessary, and, if possible, decide whether any and which of the parties was, at the date of the order 
made by him under sub-section (1), in possession of the subject of dispute: 
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that any party has been forcibly and wrongfully 
dispossessed within two months next before the date on which the report of a police officer or other 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 16 (date yet to be notified, see appendix)  

76 
 
information was received by the Magistrate, or after that date and before the date of his order under 
sub-section (1), he may treat the party so dispossessed as if that party had been in possession on the 
date of his order under sub-section (1). 
(5) Nothing in this section shall preclude any party so required to attend, or any other person 
interested, from showing that no such dispute as aforesaid exists or has existed; and in such case the 
Magistrate shall cancel his said order, and all further proceedings thereon shall be stayed, but, subject 
to such cancellation, the order of the Magistrate under sub-section (1) shall be final. 
(6) (a) If the Magistrate decides that one of the parties was, or should under the proviso to sub-
section (4) be treated as being, in such possession of the said subject, he shall issue an order 
declaring such party to be entitled to possession thereof until evicted therefrom in due course of law, 
and forbidding all disturbance of such possession until such eviction; and when he proceeds under 
the proviso to sub-section  (4), may restore to possession the party forcibly and wrongfully 
dispossessed. 
(b) The order made under this sub-section shall be served and published in the manner laid down 
in sub-section (3). 
(7) When any party to any such proceeding dies, the Magistrate may cause the legal 
representative of the deceased party to be made a party to the proceeding and shall thereupon 
continue the inquiry, and if any question arises as to who the legal representative of a deceased party 
for the purposes of such proceeding is, all persons claiming to be representatives of the deceased 
party shall be made parties thereto. 
(8) If the Magistrate is of opinion that any crop or other produce of the property, the subject of dispute in a 
proceeding under this section pending before him, is subject to speedy and natural decay, he may make an 
order for the proper custody or sale of such property, and, upon the completion of the inquiry, shall make such 
order for the disposal of such property, or the sale-proceeds thereof, as he thinks fit. 
(9) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, at any stage of the proceedings under this section, on the 
application of either party, issue a summons to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any 
document or thing. 
(10) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to be in derogation of powers of the Magistrate to 
proceed under section 107. 
146. Power to attach subject of dispute and to appoint receiver.—(1) If the Magistrate at any time 
after making the order under sub-section (1) of section 145 considers the case to be one of emergency, or 
if he decides that none of the parties was then in such possession as is referred to in section 145, or if he is 
unable to satisfy himself as to which of them was then in such possession of the subject of dispute, he 
may attach the subject of dispute until a competent Court has determined the rights of the parties thereto 
with regard to the person entitled to the possession thereof: 
Provided that such Magistrate may withdraw the attachment at any time if he is satisfied that there is 
no longer any likelihood of breach of the peace with regard to the subject of dispute. 
(2) When the Magistrate attaches the subject of dispute, he may, if no receiver in relation to such 
subject of dispute has been appointed by any Civil Court, make such arrangements as he considers proper 
for looking after the property or if he thinks fit, appoint a receiver thereof, who shall have, subject to the 
control of the Magistrate, all the powers of a receiver appointed under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908): 
Provided that in the event of a receiver being subsequently appointed in relation to the subject of 
dispute by any Civil Court, the Magistrate— 
(a) shall order the receiver appointed by him to hand over the possession of the subject of dispute 
to the receiver appointed by the Civil Court and shall thereafter discharge the receiver appointed by 
him; 
(b) may make such other incidental or consequential orders as may be just. 
147. Dispute concerning right of use of land or water.—(1) Whenever an Executive Magistrate is 

77 
 
satisfied from the report of a police officer or upon other information, that a dispute likely to cause a 
breach of the peace exists regarding any alleged right of user of any land or water within his local 
jurisdiction, whether such right be claimed as an easement or otherwise, he shall  make  an  order in 
writing,  stating  the  grounds  of  his  being so satisfied and requiring the parties concerned in such 
dispute to attend his Court in person or by pleader on a specified date and time and to put in written 
statements of their respective claims. 
Explanation.—The expression “land or water” has the meaning given to it in sub-section (2) of 
section 145. 
(2) The Magistrate shall then persue the statements so put in, hear the parties, receive all such 
evidence as may be produced by them respectively, consider the effect of such evidence, take such further 
evidence, if any, as he thinks necessary and, if possible, decide whether such right exists; and the 
provisions of section 145 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of such inquiry. 
(3) If it appears to such Magistrate that such rights exist, he may make an order prohibiting any 
interference with the exercise of such right, including, in a proper case, an order for the removal of any 
obstruction in the exercise of any such right: 
Provided that no such order shall be made where the right is exercisable at all times of the year, 
unless such right has been exercised within three months next before the receipt under sub-section (1) of 
the report of a police officer or other information leading to the institution of the inquiry, or where the 
right is exercisable only at particular seasons or on particular occasions, unless the right has been 
exercised during the last of such seasons or on the last of such occasions before such receipt. 
(4) When in any proceedings commenced under sub-section (1) of section 145 the Magistrate finds 
that the dispute is as regards an alleged right of user of land or water, he may, after recording his reasons, 
continue with the proceedings as if they had been commenced under sub-section (1), 
and when in any proceedings commenced under sub-section (1) the magistrate finds that the dispute 
should be dealt with under section 145, he may, after recording his reasons, continue with the proceedings 
as if they had been commenced under sub-section (1) of section 145. 
148. Local inquiry.—(1) Whenever a local inquiry is necessary for the purposes of section 145, section 146 or 
section 147, a District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate may depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to 
make the inquiry, and may furnish him with such written instructions as may seem necessary for his guidance, and 
may declare by whom the whole or any part of the necessary expenses of the inquiry shall be paid. 
(2) The report of the person so deputed may be read as evidence in the case. 
(3) When any costs have been incurred by any party to a proceeding under section 145, section 146 or section 
147, the Magistrate passing a decision may direct by whom such costs shall be paid, whether by such party or by any 
other party to the proceeding, and whether in whole or in part or proportion and such costs may include any 
expenses incurred in respect of witnesses and of pleaders’ fees, which the Court may consider reasonable. 
CHAPTER XI 
PREVENTIVE ACTION OF THE POLICE 
149. Police to prevent cognizable offences.—Every police officer may interpose for the purpose of preventing, 
and shall, to the best of his ability, prevent, the commission of any cognizable offence. 
150. Information of design to commit cognizable offences.—Every police officer receiving information of a 
design to commit any cognizable offence shall communicate such information to the police officer to whom he is 
subordinate, and to any other officer whose duty it is to prevent or take cognizance of the commission of any such 
offence. 
151. Arrest to prevent the commission of cognizable offences.—(1) A police officer knowing of a design to 
commit any cognizable offence may arrest, without orders from a Magistrate and without a warrant, the person so 
designing, if it appears to such officer that the commission of the offence cannot be otherwise prevented. 
(2) No person arrested under sub-section (1) shall be detained in custody for a period exceeding twenty-four 
hours from the time of his arrest unless his further detention is required or authorised under any other provisions of 
this Code or of any other law for the time being in force. 

78 
 
152. Prevention of injury to public property.—A police officer may of his own authority interpose to prevent 
any injury attempted to be committed in his view to any public property, movable or immovable, or the removal or 
injury of any public landmark or buoy or other mark used for navigation. 
153. Inspection of weights and measures.—(1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, without a 
warrant, enter any place within the limits of such station for the purpose of inspecting or searching for any weights 
or measures or instruments for weighing, used or kept therein, whenever he has reason to believe that there are in 
such place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are false. 
(2) If he finds in such place any weights, measures or instruments for weighing which are false, he may seize 
the same, and shall forthwith give information of such seizure to a Magistrate having jurisdiction. 
CHAPTER XII 
INFORMATION TO THE POLICE AND THEIR POWERS TO INVESTIGATE 
154. Information in cognizable cases.—(1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable 
offence, if given orally to an officer in charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his 
direction, and be read over to the informant; and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to 
writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it, and the substance thereof shall be entered in a book to 
be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf: 
1[Provided that if the information is given by the woman against whom an offence under section 326A,             
section 326B, section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 2[section 376A, 
section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], section 376E or section 
509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted, then such information 
shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer: 
Provided further that— 
(a) in the event that the person against whom an offence under section 354, section 354A, section 354B, 
section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 1[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C,          
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted, is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically 
disabled, then such information shall be recorded by a police officer, at the residence of the person seeking to 
report such offence or at a convenient place of such person’s choice, in the presence of an interpreter or a 
special educator, as the case may be; 
(b) the recording of such information shall be video graphed; 
(c) the police officer shall get the statement of the person recorded by a Judicial Magistrate under clause (a) 
of sub-section (5A) of section 164 as soon as possible.] 
(2) A copy of the information as recorded under sub-section (1) shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant. 
(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer in charge of a police station to record the 
information referred to in sub-section (1) may send the substance of such information, in writing and by post, to the 
Superintendent of Police concerned who, if satisfied that such information discloses the commission of a cognizable 
offence, shall either investigate the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by any police officer 
subordinate to him, in the manner provided by this Code, and such officer shall have all the powers of an officer in 
charge of the police station in relation to that offence. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 13 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 11, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2019). 

79 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (here-in-after referred to as 
the Code) for the words and figure “or section 509” the words, figures, letters and punctuations, “ section 509, 
section 509A or section 509B” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 7.] 
155.  Information as to non-cognizable cases and investigation of such cases.—(1) When information is given to 
an officer in charge of a police station of the commission within the limits of such station of a non-cognizable offence, he 
shall enter or cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the 
State Government may prescribe in this behalf, and refer the informant to the Magistrate. 
(2) No police officer shall investigate a non-cognizable case without the order of a Magistrate having power to 
try such case or commit the case for trial. 
(3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers in respect of the investigation 
(except the power to arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge of a police station may exercise in a cognizable 
case. 
(4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognizable, the case shall be deemed 
to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other offences are non-cognizable. 
156.  Police officer’s power to investigate cognizable case.—(1) Any officer in charge of a police station may, 
without the order of a Magistrate, investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area 
within the limits of such station would have power to inquire into or try under the provisions of Chapter XIII. 
(2) No proceeding of a police officer in any such case shall at any stage be called in question on the ground 
that the case was one which such officer was not empowered under this section to investigate. 
(3) Any Magistrate empowered under section 190 may order such an investigation as above-mentioned. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section  156.—In section 156 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) in its 
application to the State of Maharashtra (Hereinafter referred to as “the said Code”), after sub-section (3), the 
following provisos shall be added, namely:— 
“Provided that, no Magistrate shall order an investigation under this section against a person who is or was a public 
servant as defined under any other law for the time being in force, in respect of the act done by such public servant while 
acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties, except with the previous sanction under section 197 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or under any law for the time being in force: 
Provided further that, the sanctioning authority shall take a decision within a period of ninety days from the 
date of the receipt of the proposal for sanction and in case the sanctioning authority fails to take the decision within 
the said stipulated period of ninety days, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by the sanctioning 
authority.”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 33 of 2016, s. 2.] 
157. Procedure for investigation.—(1) If, from information received or otherwise, an officer in charge of a 

80 
 
police station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered under section 156 to 
investigate, he shall forthwith send a report of the same to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of such 
offence upon a police report and shall proceed in person, or shall depute one of his subordinate officers not being 
below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this behalf, to proceed, to 
the spot, to investigate the facts and circumstances of the case, and, if necessary, to take measures for the discovery 
and arrest of the offender: 
Provided that— 
(a) when information as to the commission of any such offence is given against any person by name and 
the case is not of a serious nature, the officer in charge of a police station need not proceed in person or depute a 
subordinate officer to make an investigation on the spot; 
 (b) if it appears to the officer in charge of a police station that there is no sufficient ground for entering on 
an investigation, he shall not investigate the case. 
1[Provided further that in relation to an offence of rape, the recording of statement of the victim shall be 
conducted at the residence of the victim or in the place of her choice and as far as practicable by a woman police 
officer in the presence of her parents or guardian or near relatives or social worker of the locality.]  
 (2) In each of the cases mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1), the officer in charge 
of the police station shall state in his report his reasons for not fully complying with the requirements of that sub-
section, and, in the case mentioned in clause (b) of the said proviso, the officer shall also forthwith notify to the 
informant, if any, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, the fact that he will not investigate 
the case or cause it to be investigated. 
158. Report how submitted.—(1) Every report sent to a Magistrate under section 157 shall, if the State 
Government so directs, be submitted through such superior officer of police as the State Government, by general or 
special order, appoints in that behalf. 
(2) Such superior officer may give such instructions to the officer in charge of the police station as he thinks fit, 
and shall, after recording such instructions on such report, transmit the same without delay to the Magistrate. 
159. Power to hold investigation or preliminary inquiry.—Such Magistrate, on receiving such report, may direct 
an investigation, or, if he thinks fit, at once proceed, or depute any Magistrate subordinate to him to proceed, to hold a 
preliminary inquiry into, or otherwise to dispose of, the case in the manner provided in this Code. 
160. Police officer’s power to require attendance of witnesses.—(1) Any police officer making an investigation 
under this Chapter may, by order in writing, require the attendance before himself of any person being within the limits 
of his own or any adjoining station who, from the information given or otherwise, appears to be acquainted with the 
facts and circumstances of the case; and such person shall attend as so required: 
Provided that no male person 2[under the age of fifteen years or above the age of sixty-five years or a woman or 
a mentally or physically disabled person] shall be required to attend at any place other than the place in which such 
male person or woman resides. 
(2) The State Government may, by rules made in this behalf, provide for the payment by the police officer of the 
reasonable expenses of every person, attending under sub-section (1) at any place other than his residence. 
161. Examination of witnesses by police.—(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, 
or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe in this 
behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the 
facts and circumstances of the case. 
(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by such officer, 
other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.11 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 14, for “under the age of fifteen years or woman” (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 

81 
 
or forfeiture. 
(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an examination under 
this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the statement of each such person whose 
statement he records. 
1[Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means:] 
2[Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 354, section 354A, 
section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 3[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is 
alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer.]  
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
The second proviso to sub-section (3) of section 161 of the Code, shall be substituted with the following proviso, 
namely: — 
Provided further that statement of the woman against whom an offence under section 354, section 354A, section 
354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 354E, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 
376D, section 376E, section 509, section 509A or section 509B of the Indian Penal Code, is alleged to have been 
committed or attempted, shall be recorded, as far as possible, by woman police officer and shall also be recorded by 
audio-video means, as far as possible, and it shall be the duty of such police officer to take all such steps as are 
necessary to protect the identity of the woman. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 8] 
162. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence.—(1) No statement made by any 
person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed 
by the person making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, 
or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial 
in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made: 
Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose statement has been 
reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the 
permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be 
used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-
examination. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of clause (1) of 
section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); or to affect the provisions of section 27 of that Act. 
Explanation.—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred to in sub-section (1) may 
amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise relevant having regard to the context in 
which such omission occurs and whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a 
question of fact. 
163. No inducement to be offered.—(1) No police officer or other person in authority shall offer or make, or 
cause to be offered or made, any such inducement, threat or promise as is mentioned in section 24 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 
(2) But no police officer or other person shall prevent, by any caution or otherwise, any person from making in 
the course of any investigation under this Chapter any statement which he may be disposed to make of his own free 
will: 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 12 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 12, for “section 376A section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 22-4-2018). 

82 
 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 164. 
164. Recording of confessions and statements.—(1) Any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate may, 
whether or not he has jurisdiction in the case, record any confession or statement made to him in the course of an 
investigation under this Chapter or under any other law for the time being in force, or at any time afterwards before 
the commencement of the inquiry or trial: 
1[Provided that any confession or statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video 
electronic means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of an offence: 
Provided  further that no confession shall be recorded by a police officer on whom any power  of a Magistrate 
has been conferred under any law for the time being in force.] 
 (2) The Magistrate shall, before recording any such confession, explain to the person making it that he is not 
bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, it may be used as evidence against him; and the Magistrate shall 
not record any such confession unless, upon questioning the person making it, he has reason to believe that it is 
being made voluntarily. 
(3) If at any time before the confession is recorded, the person appearing before the Magistrate states that he is not 
willing to make the confession, the Magistrate shall not authorise the detention of such person in police custody. 
(4) Any such confession shall be recorded in the manner provided in section 281 for recording the examination 
of an accused person and shall be signed by the person making the confession; and the Magistrate shall make a 
memorandum at the foot of such record to the following effect:— 
“I have explained to (name) that he is not bound to make a confession and that, if he does so, any confession 
he may make may be used as evidence against him and I believe that this confession was voluntarily made. It 
was taken in my presence and hearing, and was read over to the person making it and admitted by him to be 
correct, and it contains a full and true account of the statement made by him. 
(Signed) A. B. 
Magistrate.” 
(5) Any statement (other than a confession) made under sub-section (1) shall be recorded in such manner 
hereinafter provided for the recording of evidence as is, in the opinion of the Magistrate, best fitted to the 
circumstances of the case; and the Magistrate shall have power to administer oath to the person whose statement is 
so recorded. 
2[(5A) (a) In cases punishable under section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D,                
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 376, 3[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C,          
section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB,] section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
the Judicial Magistrate shall record the statement of the person against whom such offence has been committed in 
the manner prescribed in sub-section (5), as soon as the commission of the offence is brought to the notice of the 
police: 
Provided that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically disabled, 
the Magistrate shall take the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement: 
Provided further that if the person making the statement is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically 
disabled, the statement made by the person, with the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator, shall be video 
graphed. 
(b) A statement recorded under clause (a) of a person, who is temporarily or permanently mentally or physically 
disabled, shall be considered a statement in lieu of examination-in-chief, as specified in section 137 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) such that the maker of the statement can be cross-examined on such statement, 
without the need for recording the same at the time of trial.] 
(6) The Magistrate recording a confession or statement under this section shall forward it to the Magistrate by 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s.13 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 16 (w.e.f. 13-3-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 13, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 22-4-2018). 

83 
 
whom the case is to be inquired into or tried. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In clause (a) of sub-section (5A) of Section 164 of the Code, for the words and figures “or section 
509” the punctuation, words and figures, “section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B” shall 
be substituted. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 9]  
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep 
After sub-section (1) of section 164, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: —“(1A) 
Where; in any island, there is no Judicial Magistrate for the time being, and the State Government is of 
opinion that it is necessary and expedient so to do, that Government may, after consulting the High Court, 
specially empower any Executive Magistrate (not being a police officer), to exercise the powers conferred 
by sub-section (1) on a Judicial Magistrate, and thereupon references in section 164 to a Judicial 
Magistrate shall be construed as references to the Executive Magistrate so empowered.”; 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 5.] 
1[164A. Medical examination of the victim of rape.—(1) Where, during the stage when an offence of 
committing rape or attempt to commit rape is under investigation, it is proposed to get the person of the woman with 
whom rape is alleged or attempted to have been committed or attempted, examined by a medical expert, such 
examination shall be conducted by a registered medical practitioner employed in a hospital run by the Government 
or a local authority and in the absence of such a practitioner, by any other registered medical practitioner, with the 
consent of such woman or of a person competent to give such consent on her behalf and such woman shall be sent to 
such registered medical practitioner within twenty-four hours from the time of receiving the information relating to 
the commission of such offence. 
 (2) The registered medical practitioner, to whom such woman is sent, shall, without delay, examine her person 
and prepare a report of his examination giving the following particulars, namely:— 
(i) the name and address of the woman and of the person by whom she was brought; 
(ii) the age of the woman; 
(iii) the description of material taken from the person of the woman for DNA profiling; 
(iv) marks of injury, if any, on the person of the woman; 
(v) general mental condition of the woman; and 
(vi) other material particulars in reasonable detail. 
(3) The report shall state precisely the reasons for each conclusion arrived at. 
(4) The report shall specifically record that the consent of the woman or of the person competent to give such 
consent on her behalf to such examination had been obtained. 
(5) The exact time of commencement and completion of the examination shall also be noted in the report. 
(6) The registered medical practitioner shall, without delay forward the report to the investigating officer who 
shall forward it to the Magistrate referred to in section 173 as part of the documents referred to in clause (a) of            
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 17 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

84 
 
sub-section (5) of that section. 
(7) Nothing in this section shall be construed as rendering lawful any examination without the consent of the 
woman or of any person competent to give such consent on her behalf. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “examination” and “registered medical practitioner” shall have 
the same meanings as in section 53.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In Section 164A, except explanation clause, of the Code, for the words “registered medical practitioner”, where 
it occurs for the first time, the words “female registered medical practitioner” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015 s. 10.] 
165. Search by police officer.—(1) Whenever an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer making 
an investigation has reasonable grounds for believing that anything necessary for the purposes of an investigation 
into any offence which he is authorised to investigate may be found in any place within the limits of the police 
station of which he is in charge, or to which he is attached, and that such thing cannot in his opinion be otherwise 
obtained without undue delay, such officer may, after recording in writing the grounds of his belief and specifying in 
such writing, so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made, search, or cause search to be made, for 
such thing in any place within the limits of such station. 
(2) A police officer proceeding under sub-section (1), shall, if practicable, conduct the search in person. 
(3) If he is unable to conduct the search in person, and there is no other person competent to make the search 
present at the time, he may, after recording in writing his reasons for so doing, require any officer subordinate to him 
to make the search, and he shall deliver to such subordinate officer an order in writing, specifying the place to be 
searched, and so far as possible, the thing for which search is to be made; and such subordinate officer may 
thereupon search for such thing in such place. 
(4) The provisions of this Code as to search-warrants and the general provisions as to searches contained in 
section 100 shall, so far as may be, apply to a search made under this section. 
(5) Copies of any record made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) shall forthwith be sent to the nearest 
Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence, and the owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on 
application, be furnished, free of cost, with a copy of the same by the Magistrate. 
166. When officer in charge of police station may require another to issue search-warrant.—(1) An officer 
in charge of a police station or a police officer not being below the rank of sub-inspector making an investigation 
may require an officer in charge of another police station, whether in the same or a different district, to cause a 
search to be made in any place, in any case in which the former officer might cause such search to be made, within 
the limits of his own station. 
(2) Such officer, on being so required, shall proceed according to the provisions of section 165, and shall 
forward the thing found, if any, to the officer at whose request the search was made. 
 (3) Whenever there is reason to believe that the delay  occasioned by requiring  an officer in charge of another 
police station to cause a search to be made under sub-section (1) might result in evidence of the commission of an 
offence being concealed or destroyed, it shall be lawful for an officer in charge of a police station or a police officer 
making any  investigation under this  Chapter to search, or cause to be searched, any  place in the limits of another 
police station in accordance with the provisions of section 165, as if such place were within the limits of his own 
police station. 
(4) Any officer conducting a search under sub-section (3) shall forthwith send notice of the search to the officer 
in charge of the police station within the limits of which such place is situate, and shall also send with such notice a 
copy of the list (if any) prepared under section 100, and shall also send to the nearest Magistrate empowered to take 
cognizance of the offence, copies of the records referred to in sub-sections (1) and (3) of section 165. 
(5) The owner or occupier of the place searched shall, on application, be furnished free of cost with a copy of 

85 
 
any record sent to the Magistrate under sub-section (4). 
1[166A. Letter of request to competent authority for investigation in a country or place outside India.—
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, if, in the course of an investigation into an offence, an 
application is made by the investigating officer or any officer superior in rank to the investigating officer that 
evidence may be available in a country or place outside India, any Criminal Court may issue a letter of request to a 
Court or an authority in that country or place competent to deal with such request to examine orally any person 
supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case and to record his statement made in the 
course of such examination and also to require such person or any other person to produce any document or thing 
which may be in his possession pertaining to the case and to forward all the evidence so taken or collected or the 
authenticated copies thereof or the thing so collected to the Court issuing such letter. 
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf. 
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be the 
evidence collected during the course of investigation under this Chapter. 
166B. Letter of request from a country or place outside India to a Court or an authority for investigation 
in India.—(1) Upon receipt of a letter of request from a Court or an authority in a country or place outside India 
competent to issue such letter in that country or place for the examination of any person or production of any 
document or thing in relation to an offence under investigation in that country or place, the Central Government 
may, if it thinks fit— 
 (i) forward the same to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Chief Judicial Magistrate or such 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, who shall thereupon summon 
the person before him and record his statement or cause the document or thing to be produced; or 
(ii) send the letter to any police officer for investigation, who shall thereupon investigate into the offence in 
the same manner, 
as if the offence had been committed within India. 
(2) All the evidence taken or collected under sub-section (1), or authenticated copies thereof or the thing so 
collected, shall be forwarded by the Magistrate or police officer, as the case may be, to the Central Government for 
transmission to the Court or the authority issuing the letter of request, in such manner as the Central Government 
may deem fit.] 
167. Procedure when  investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours.—(1) Whenever any person 
is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears that the  investigation cannot be   completed within the  period of 
twenty-four hours fixed by section 57, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well-
founded, the officer in charge of the police station or the  police officer making the  investigation, if he is not below 
the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary 
hereinafter  prescribed  relating to the case, and  shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate. 
 (2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this section may, whether he has or has not 
jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time, authorise the detention of the accused in such custody as such 
Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the case 
or commit it for trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a 
Magistrate having such jurisdiction:  
Provided that—  
2[(a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused person, otherwise than in custody of the 
police, beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no 
Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody under this paragraph for a total period 
exceeding—  
(i) ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years; 
                                                 
 1. Ins. by Act 10 of 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-12-1990).  
 2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 13, for paragraph (a)  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

86 
 
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence, 
and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the case may be, the accused person shall be 
released on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every person released on bail under this sub-section 
shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter;] 
1[(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused in custody of the police under this section 
unless the accused is produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till the 
accused remains in the custody of the police, but the Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody 
on production of the accused either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage;] 
 (c) no Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in this behalf by the High Court, shall 
authorise detention in the custody of the police. 
2[Explanation I.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the 
period specified in paragraph (a), the accused shall be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail.] 
3[Explanation II.—If any question arises whether an accused person was produced before the Magistrate as 
required under clause (b), the production of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order 
authorising detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to production of the accused person through the 
medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may be.] 
4[Provided further that in case of a woman under eighteen years of age, the detention shall be authorised to be in 
the custody of a remand home or recognised social institution.]  
 5[(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the officer in charge of the 
police station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank of a sub-inspector, may, 
where a Judicial Magistrate is not available, transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers of a 
Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate have been conferred, a copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter 
prescribed relating to the case, and shall, at the same time, forward the accused to such Executive Magistrate, and 
thereupon such Executive Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, authorise the detention of the 
accused person in such custody as he may think fit for a term not exceeding seven days in the aggregate; and, on the 
expiry of the period of detention so authorised, the accused person shall be released on bail except where an order 
for further detention of the accused person has been made by a Magistrate competent to make such order; and, 
where an order for such further detention is made, the period during which the accused person was detained in 
custody under the orders made by an Executive Magistrate under this sub-section, shall be taken into account in 
computing the period specified in paragraph (a) of the proviso to sub-section (2): 
Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaid, the Executive Magistrate shall transmit to the nearest 
Judicial Magistrate the records of the case together with a copy of the entries in the diary relating to the case which 
was transmitted to him by the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer making the investigation, as 
the case may be.] 
(3) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention in the custody of the police shall record his reasons for 
so doing. 
 (4) Any Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate making such order shall forward a copy of his 
order, with his reasons for making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate. 
(5) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons-case, the investigation is not concluded within a period 
of six months from the date on which the accused was arrested, the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further 
investigation into the offence unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate that for special 
reasons and in the interests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond the period of six months is 
necessary. 
(6) Where any order stopping further investigation into an offence has been made under sub-section (5), the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 14,  for cl. (b) (w.e.f. 31-12-2009)  
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 13  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
3. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s.14, for Explanation II (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 
4. Ins. by s.14, ibid., (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
5. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s.13 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

87 
 
Sessions Judge may, if he is satisfied, on an application made to him or otherwise, that further investigation into the 
offence ought to be made, vacate the order made under sub-section (5) and direct further investigation to be made 
into the offence subject to such directions with regard to bail and other matters as he may specify. 
 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Gujarat 
In the proviso to sub-Section (2) of section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to the 
State of Gujarat, — 
(i) for paragraph (a), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely: — 
(a) the Magistrate may authorise detention of the accused person, otherwise than in the custody of the police, 
beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate 
shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody under this section for a total period exceeding— 
(i) one hundred and twenty days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years, 
(ii) sixty days, where the investigation relates to any offence; 
and, on the expiry of the said period of one hundred and twenty days, or sixty days, as the ease may be, the accused 
person shall be released on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail; and every person released on bail under this 
section shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter; 
(ii) in paragraph (b), for the words “no Magistrate shall” the words “no Magistrate shall, except for reason to 
be recorded in writing” shall be substituted; 
(iii) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation II, and before Explanation II as so numbered, the 
following Explanation shall be inserted, namely: — 
Explanation I. —For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that, notwithstanding the expiry of the period 
specified in paragraph (a), the accused person shall be detained in custody so long as he does not furnish bail. 
Amendment to apply to pending investigation.—The provisions of section 167 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973, as amended by this Act, shall apply to every investigation pending immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, if the period of detention of the accused person, otherwise than in the custody of the 
police, authorised under that section, had not, at such commencement, exceeded sixty days.] 
[Vide Gujarat Act 21 of 1976, s. 2 & 3] 
Gujarat 
In Section 167, in sub-section (2) : — 
(1) in the proviso, for paragraph (b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorise further detention in any custody under this section unless— 
(i) where the accused is in the custody of police, he is produced in person before the Magistrate, and 
(ii) where the accused is otherwise than in the custody of the police, he is produced before the Magistrate 
either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage, in accordance with the direction of the 
Magistrate.”; 
(2) in Explanation II, after the words “ whether an accused person was produced before the Magistrate”, the 
words “in person or, as the case may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage” shall be inserted. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 31 of 2003, s. 2.] 
Chhattisgarh 
(1) In clause (b) of Sub-Section (2) of Section 167 of the principal Act, for the word “any” the word “police” 
shall be substituted. 
(2) After clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 167 of the Principal Act, the following new sub-clause (bb) 
shall be added, namely:— 
“(bb) No magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused person other than in the custody of the police under 
this section unless the accused is produced before him either in person of through the medium of electronic video 
linkage and represented by his pleader in the Court.” 

88 
 
(3) In explanation II, after words “was produced” the word “from police custody” shall be added. 
(4) After explanation II, the following new explanation shall be added:- 
“III. If any question arises whether an accused person was produced from otherwise than in the custody of the 
police in person or (as the case may be) through medium of electronic video linkage before the Magistrate as 
required under paragraph (bb), the production of the accused person may be proved by his or his pleader’s signature 
on the order authorising detention.” 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 13 of 2006, sec. 3] 
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep 
In section 167,— 
(i) in sub-section (1) after the words “nearest Judicial Magistrate” the words “or, if there is no 
Judicial Magistrate in an island, to an Executive Magistrate functioning in that island” shall be inserted;   
(ii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(1A) Where a copy of the entries in diary is transmitted to an Executive Magistrate, reference in section 167 
to a Magistrate shall be construed as references to such Executive Magistrate;” 
(iii) to sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be added, namely:— 
“Provided that no Executive Magistrate other than the District Magistrate or Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall 
unless he is specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government, authorise detention in the custody 
of the police.” 
(iv) to sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be added, namely:— 
“Provided that, where such order is made by an Executive Magistrate, the Magistrate making the order 
shall forward a copy of the order, with his reasons for making it, to the Executive Magistrate to whom he is 
immediately subordinate.” 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 5.] 
Maharashtra 
Amendment of section 167. — In Section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (2 of 1974) in 
its application to the State of Maharashtra,— 
(a) in sub-section (2) in the proviso, for paragraph (b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody, of the accused person under this section 
unless, the accused person is produced before him in person, and for any extension of custody 
otherwise than the extension in the police custody, the accused person may be produced either in 
person or through the medium of electronic video linkage.” ; 
(b) in Explanation II, for the words “an accused person was produced”, the words “an accused person 
was produced in person or as the case may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage” shall be 
substituted. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 8 of 2005, s. 2] 
Madhya Pradesh  
 
Amendment of Section 167.—In sub-section (2) of section 167 of the principal Act,— (i) in the 
proviso, for paragraph (b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely: — 
 “(b) no magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this section unless the accused is 
produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every time till such time the accused 
remains in the custody of police, but the Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody on 
production of accused either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage;”; 
 
(ii) for Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:— 
“Explanation II.—If any question arise whether an accused person was produced before the 
Magistrate as required under paragraph (b), the production of the accused person may be proved by his 

89 
 
signature on the order authorising detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to production 
of the accused person through the medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may be.”. 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 2008, s. 3.] 
West Bengal  
In section 167 of the principal Act,— 
(a) In Section 167 of sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted:— 
“(5) If, in respect of— 
(i) any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons case, the investigation is not concluded within 
a period of six months, or 
(ii) any case exclusively triable by a Court of Session or a case under Chapter XVIII of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the investigation is not concluded within a period of three years, or
 
(iii) any case other than those mentioned in clauses (i) and (ii), the investigation is not 
concluded within a period of two years, from the date on which the accused was arrested or made 
his appearance, the Magistrate shall make an order stopping further investigation into the offence 
and shall discharge the accused unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate 
that for special reasons and in the interests of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond 
the periods mentioned in this sub-section is necessary.”; 
(b) in sub-section (6), after the “words any order stopping further investigation into an offence has 
been made” the words “and the accused has been discharged” shall be inserted. 
 [Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 1988, s. 4.] 
West Bengal 
Amendment of section 167.- In the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 167 of the principal Act, for 
clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted:— 
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorize detention under this section— 
(i) in the police custody, unless the accused is produced before him in person every time till the 
accused is in police custody; 
(ii) in the judicial custody, unless the accused is produced before him either in person or through 
the medium of electronic video linkage;”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 20 of 2004, s. 3.] 
Assam 
In Section 167 of the Code:— 
(a) in sub-section (i) the reference to “Judicial Magistrate” shall be construed as reference also to 
executive Magistrate; 
(b) in sub-section (2):— 
(i) for the word “Magistrate” at the first two places where that word is preceded by the definite 
article, the words “Judicial Magistrate or the Executive Magistrate, as the case may be,” shall be 
substituted; 
(ii) for the word “Magistrate”, at the place where that word is preceded by the indefinite article 
“a”, the words and brackets “Magistrate (whether Judicial or Executive)” shall be substituted; 
(iii) paragraph (c) of the proviso shall be omitted; 
(c) Sub-section (2A) shall be omitted:— 
(d) in sub-section (4), for the words “to the Chief Judicial Magistrate,” the words “where such 
Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate and where such Magistrate is an  
Executive Magistrate to the Session Judge” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3(3) and the Schedule.]  
Delhi 
In its application to the State of Delhi, in section 167, in sub-section (2):— 

90 
 
(i) for clause (b), substitute the following clause, namely:— 
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this section unless the accused is 
produced before him either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage: 
Provided that if the accused is in police custody, no Magistrate shall authorise his detention in any 
custody unless the accused is produced before him in person;” 
(ii) for the Explanation II thereunder, substitute the following Explanation, namely:— 
“Explanation II.- If any question arises whether an accused person was produced in person or, as 
the case may be, through the medium of electronic video linkage before the magistrate as required 
under paragraph (b), the production of the accused person may be proved by his signature on the order 
authorising his detention or by video recording of the proceedings, as the case may be.”. 
[Vide Delhi Act 4 of 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-8-2004).] 
Orissa 
Amendment of section 167.—In the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 167 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),- 
(i) for paragraph (b), the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(b) no Magistrate shall authorize detention of the accused in custody of the police under this 
section unless the accused in produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently every 
time till the accused remains in the custody of the police, but the Magistrate may extend further 
detention in Judicial custody on production of the accused either in person or through the medium of 
electronic video linkage;”, and 
 (ii) for Explanation II, the following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:— 
“Explanation II— If any question arises whether an accused person was produced before the 
Magistrate as required under paragraph (b), the production of the accused person may be proved by 
his signature on the order authorizing detention or by the order certified by the Magistrate as to 
production of the accused person through the medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may 
be.”. 
[Vide Orissa Act 16 of 2009, s. 2] 
Amendment of section 167.— In section 167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in paragraph (a) 
of the proviso to sub-section (2),— 
(i) For the words “under this paragraph” the words “under this section” shall be substituted; and 
(ii) For the words “ninety days” wherever they occur, the words “ one hundred and twenty days” 
shall be substituted. 
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1997, s. 2] 
168. Report of investigation by subordinate police officer.—When any subordinate police officer has made 
any investigation under this Chapter, he shall report the result of such investigation to the officer in charge of the 
police station. 
169. Release of accused when evidence deficient.—If, upon an  investigation under this Chapter, it  appears to 
the officer in charge of the police station that there is  not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to 
justify the forwarding of the accused to a Magistrate, such officer shall, if such person is in custody, release him on 
his executing a bond, with or without sureties, as such officer may direct, to appear, if and when so required, before 
a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, and to try the accused or commit him 
for trial. 
170. Cases to be sent to Magistrate, when evidence is sufficient.—(1) If, upon an investigation under this 
Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge of the police station that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground  
as  aforesaid, such  officer  shall  forward  the accused under custody to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance 
of the offence upon a police report and to try the accused or commit him for trial, or, if the offence is bailable and 

91 
 
the accused is able to give security, shall take security from him for his appearance before such Magistrate on a day 
fixed and for his attendance from day to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed. 
(2) When the officer in charge of a police station forwards an accused person to a Magistrate or takes security 
for his appearance before such Magistrate under this section, he shall send to such Magistrate any weapon or other 
article which it may be necessary to produce before him, and shall require the complainant (if any) and so many of 
the persons who appear to such officer to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case as he may think 
necessary, to execute a bond to appear before the Magistrate as thereby directed and prosecute or give evidence (as 
the case may be) in the matter of the charge against the accused. 
(3) If the Court of the Chief Judicial Magistrate is mentioned in the bond, such Court shall be held to include 
any Court to which such Magistrate may refer the case for inquiry or trial, provided reasonable notice of such 
reference is given to such complainant or persons. 
(4) The officer in whose presence the bond is executed shall deliver a copy thereof to one of the persons who 
executed it, and shall then send to the Magistrate the original with his report. 
171. Complainant and witnesses not to be required to accompany police officer and not to be subjected to 
restraint.—No complainant or witness on his way to any Court shall be required to accompany a police officer, or 
shall be subjected to unnecessary restraint or inconvenience, or required to give any security for his appearance 
other than his own bond: 
Provided that, if any complainant or witness refuses to attend or to execute a bond as directed in section 170, the 
officer in charge of the police station may forward him in custody to the Magistrate, who may detain him in custody 
until he executes such bond, or until the hearing of the case is completed. 
172. Diary of proceedings in investigation.—(1) Every police officer making an investigation under this 
Chapter shall day by day enter his proceedings in the investigation in a diary, setting forth the time at which the 
information reached him, the time at which he began and closed his investigation, the place or places visited by him, 
and a statement of the circumstances ascertained through his investigation. 
1[(1A) The statements of witnesses recorded during the course of investigation under section 161 shall be 
inserted in the case diary. 
(1B) The diary referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a volume and duly paginated.] 
(2) Any Criminal Court may send for the police diaries of a case under inquiry or trial in such Court, and may 
use such diaries, not as evidence in the case, but to aid it in such inquiry or trial. 
(3) Neither the accused nor his agents shall be entitled to call for such diaries, nor shall he or they be entitled to 
see them merely because they are referred to by the Court; but, if they are used by the police officer who made them 
to refresh his memory, or if the Court uses them for the purpose of contradicting such police officer, the provisions 
of section 161 or section 145, as the case may be, of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall apply. 
173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation.—(1) Every investigation under this Chapter 
shall be completed without unnecessary delay. 
2[(1A) The investigation in relation to 3[an offence under sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 
376DB or 376E] from the date on which the information was recorded by the officer in charge of the police station.] 
(2) (i) As soon as it is completed, the officer in charge of the police station shall forward to a Magistrate 
empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form prescribed by the State 
Government, stating— 
 (a) the names of the parties; 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 15 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
2. Ins. by  s. 16, ibid., (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of  2018, s. 14, for “rape of a child may be completed within three months” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 

92 
 
(b) the nature of the information; 
(c) the names of the persons who appear to be acquainted with the circumstances of the case; 
(d) whether any offence appears to have been committed and, if so, by whom; 
(e) whether the accused has been arrested; 
(f) whether he has been released on his bond and, if so, whether with or without sureties; 
(g) whether he has been forwarded in custody under section 170. 
1[(h) whether the report of medical examination of the woman has been attached where investigation relates 
to an offence under 2[ sections 376, 376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 376DA, 376DB] or section 376E of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860)].] 
(ii) The officer shall also communicate, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government, the 
action taken by him, to the person, if any, by whom the information relating to the commission of the offence was 
first given. 
(3) Where a superior officer of police has been appointed under section 158, the report shall, in any case in 
which the State Government by general or special order so directs, be submitted through that officer, and he may, 
pending the orders of the Magistrate, direct the officer in charge of the police station to make further investigation. 
(4) Whenever it appears from a report forwarded under this section that the accused has been released on his 
bond, the Magistrate shall make such order for the discharge of such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit. 
(5) When such report is in respect of a case to which section 170 applies, the police officer shall forward to the 
Magistrate along with the report— 
(a) all documents or relevant extracts thereof on which the prosecution proposes to rely other than those 
already sent to the Magistrate during investigation; 
(b) the statements recorded under section 161 of all the persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine 
as its witnesses. 
(6) If the police officer is of opinion that any part of any such statement is not relevant to the subject-matter of 
the proceedings or that its disclosure to the accused is not essential in the interests of justice and is inexpedient in the 
public interest, he shall indicate that part of the statement and append a note requesting the Magistrate to exclude 
that part from the copies to be granted to the accused and stating his reasons for making such request. 
(7) Where the police officer investigating the case finds it convenient so to do, he may furnish to the accused 
copies of all or any of the documents referred to in sub-section (5). 
 (8) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect of an offence after a 
report under sub-section (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where upon such investigation, the officer in 
charge of the police station obtains further evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a 
further report or reports regarding such evidence in the form prescribed; and the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (6) 
shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded 
under sub-section (2). 
174. Police to enquire and report on suicide, etc.—(1) When the officer in charge of a police station or some 
other police officer specially  empowered by the State Government in that behalf receives information that a person 
has committed suicide, or has been killed by another or by an animal or by machinery or by an accident, or has died 
under circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person has committed an offence, he shall 
immediately give intimation thereof to the nearest Executive Magistrate empowered to hold inquests, and, unless 
otherwise directed by any rule prescribed by the State Government, or by any general or special order of the District 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 16 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 14, for “section 376, 376A, 376B, 376C, 387D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 

93 
 
or Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall proceed to the place where the body of such deceased person is, and there, in the 
presence of two or more respectable inhabitants of the neighbourhood, shall make an investigation, and draw up a 
report of the apparent cause of death, describing such wounds, fractures, bruises, and other marks of injury as may 
be found on the body, and stating in what manner, or by what weapon or instrument (if any); such marks appear to 
have been inflicted. 
(2) The report shall be signed by such police officer and other persons, or by so many of them as 
concur therein, and shall be forthwith forwarded to the District Magistrate or the Sub-divisional 
Magistrate. 
(3) 1[When— 
(i) the case involves suicide by a woman within seven years of her marriage; or 
(ii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage in any 
circumstances raising a reasonable suspicion that some other person committed an offence in relation 
to such woman; or 
(iii) the case relates to the death of a woman within seven years of her marriage and any relative of 
the woman has made a request in this behalf; or 
(iv) there is any doubt regarding the cause of death; or  
(v) the police officer for any other reason considers it expedient so to do, 
he shall], subject to such rules as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, forward the body, 
with a view to its being examined, to the nearest Civil Surgeon, or other qualified medical man appointed 
in this behalf by the State Government, if the state of the weather and the distance admit of its being so 
forwarded without risk of such putrefaction on the road as would render such examination useless. 
(4) The following Magistrates are empowered to hold inquests, namely, any District Magistrate or 
Sub-divisional Magistrate and any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the 
State Government or the District Magistrate. 
175. Power to summon persons.—(1) A police officer proceeding under section 174 may, by order 
in writing, summon two or more persons as aforesaid for the purpose of the said investigation, and any 
other person who appears to be acquainted with the facts of the case and every person so summoned shall 
be bound to attend and to answer truly all questions other than questions the answers to which would have 
a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. 
(2) If the facts do not disclose a cognizable offence to which section 170 applies, such persons shall 
not be required by the police officer to attend a Magistrate’s Court. 
176. Inquiry by Magistrate into cause of death.—(1) 2[3*** when the case is of the nature referred 
to in clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-section (3) of section 174], the nearest Magistrate empowered to hold 
inquests shall, and in any other case mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 174, any Magistrate so 
empowered may hold an inquiry into the cause of death either instead of, or in addition to, the 
investigation held by the police officer; and if he does so, he shall have all the powers in conducting it 
which he would have in holding an inquiry into an offence. 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 25-12-1983). 
2. Subs. by,  s. 4, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 25-12-1983). 
3. Certain words omitted by Act 25 of 2005, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  

94 
 
1[(1A) Where,— 
  (a) any person dies or disappears, or 
(b) rape is alleged to have been committed on any woman, 
while such person or woman is in the custody of the police or in any other custody authorised by the 
Magistrate or the Court, under this Code in addition to the inquiry or investigation held by the police, an 
inquiry shall be held by the Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, within 
whose local jurisdiction the offence has been committed.] 
(2) The Magistrate holding such an inquiry shall record the evidence taken by him in connection 
therewith in any manner hereinafter prescribed according to the circumstances of the case. 
 (3) Whenever such Magistrate considers it expedient to make an examination of the dead body of any 
person who has been already interred, in order to discover the cause of his death, the Magistrate may 
cause the body to be disinterred and examined. 
(4) Where an inquiry is to be held under this section, the Magistrate shall, wherever practicable, 
inform the relatives of the deceased whose names and addresses are known, and shall allow them to 
remain present at the inquiry. 
3[(5) The Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate or Executive Magistrate or police officer 
holding an inquiry or investigation, as the case may be, under sub-section (1A) shall, within twenty-four 
hours of the death of a person, forward the body with a view to its being examined to the nearest Civil 
Surgeon or other qualified medical person appointed in this behalf by the State Government, unless it is 
not possible to do so for reasons to be recorded in writing.] 
Explanation.—In this section, the expression “relative” means parents, children, brothers, sisters and 
spouse. 
CHAPTER XIII 
JURISDICTION OF THE CRIMINAL COURTS IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 
177. Ordinary place of inquiry and trial.—Every offence shall ordinarily be inquired into and tried 
by a Court within whose local jurisdiction it was committed. 
178. Place of inquiry or trial.—(a) When it is uncertain in which of several local areas an offence 
was committed, or 
(b) where an offence is committed partly in one local area and partly in another, or 
(c) where an offence is a continuing one, and continues to be committed in more local areas than 
one, or 
(d) where it consists of several acts done in different local areas, 
it may be inquired into or tried by a Court having jurisdiction over any of such local areas. 
179. Offence triable where act is done or consequence ensues.—When an act is an offence by 
reason of anything which has been done and of a consequence which has ensued, the offence may be inquired into 
or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction such thing has been done or such consequence has ensued. 
180. Place of trial where act is an offence by reason of relation to other offence.—When an act is an offence 
by reason of its relation to any other act which is also an offence or which would be an offence if the doer were 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 18 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

95 
 
capable of committing an offence, the first-mentioned offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose 
local jurisdiction either act was done. 
181. Place of trial in case of certain offences.—(1) Any offence of being a thug, or murder committed by a 
thug, of dacoity, of dacoity with murder, of belonging to a gang of dacoits, or of escaping from custody, may be 
inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the accused person is 
found. 
(2) Any offence of kidnapping or abduction of a person may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose 
local jurisdiction the person was kidnapped or abducted or was conveyed or concealed or detained. 
(3) Any offence of theft, extortion or robbery may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local 
jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property which is the subject of the offence was possessed by 
any person committing it or by any person who received or retained such property knowing or having reason to 
believe it to be stolen property. 
(4) Any offence of criminal misappropriation or of criminal breach of trust may be inquired into or tried by a 
Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or any part of the property which is the subject of 
the offence was received or retained, or was required to be returned or accounted for, by the accused person. 
(5) Any offence which includes the possession of stolen property may be inquired into or tried by a Court 
within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the stolen property was possessed by any person who 
received or retained it knowing or having reason to believe it to be stolen property. 
182. Offences committed by letters, etc.—(1) Any offence which includes cheating may, if the deception is 
practised by means of letters or telecommunication messages, be inquired into or tried by any Court within whose 
local jurisdiction such letters or messages were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating and dishonestly 
inducing delivery of property may be inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the property 
was delivered by the person deceived or was received by the accused person. 
 (2) Any offence punishable under section 494 or section 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be 
inquired into or tried by a Court within whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the offender last 
resided with his or her spouse by the first marriage 1[, or the wife by the first marriage has taken up permanent 
residence after the commission of the offence]. 
183. Offence committed on journey or voyage.—When an offence is committed whilst the person by or 
against whom, or the thing in respect of which, the offence is committed is in the course of performing a journey or 
voyage, the offence may be inquired into or tried by a Court through or into whose local jurisdiction that person or 
thing passed in the course of that journey or voyage. 
184. Place of trial for offences triable together.—Where— 
(a) the offences committed by any person are such that he may be charged with, and tried at one trial for, 
each such offence by virtue of the provisions of section 219, section 220 or section 221, or 
(b) the offence or offences committed by several persons are such that they may be charged with and tried 
together by virtue of the provisions of section 223, 
the offences may be inquired into or tried by any Court competent to inquire into or try any of the offences. 
185. Power to order cases to be tried in different sessions divisions.—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the preceding provisions of this Chapter, the State Government may direct that any cases or class of cases committed 
for trial in any district may be tried in any sessions division: 
Provided that such direction is not repugnant to any direction previously issued by the High Court or the 
Supreme Court under the Constitution, or under this Code or any other law for the time being in force. 
                                                 
1.Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 15  (w.e.f. 18.12.1978).  

96 
 
186. High Court to decide, in case of doubt, district where inquiry or trial shall take place.—Where two or 
more Courts have taken cognizance of the same offence and a question arises as to which of them ought to inquire 
into or try that offence, the question shall be decided— 
(a) if the Courts are subordinate to the same High Court, by that High Court; 
(b) if the Courts are not subordinate to the same High Court, by the High Court within the local limits of 
whose appellate criminal jurisdiction the proceedings were first commenced, 
and thereupon all other proceedings in respect of that offence shall be discontinued. 
187. Power to issue summons or warrant for offence committed beyond local jurisdiction.—(1) When a 
Magistrate of the first class sees reason to believe that any person within his local jurisdiction has committed outside 
such jurisdiction (whether within or outside India) an offence which cannot, under the provisions of sections 177 to 
185 (both inclusive), or any other law for the time being in force, be inquired into or tried within such jurisdiction 
but is under some law for the time being in force triable in India, such Magistrate may inquire into the offence as if 
it had been committed within such local jurisdiction and compel such person in the manner hereinbefore provided to 
appear before him, and send such person to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to inquire into or try such offence, or, 
if such offence is not punishable with death or imprisonment for life and such person is ready and willing to give 
bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate acting under this section, take a bond with or without sureties for his 
appearance before the Magistrate having such jurisdiction. 
(2) When there are more Magistrates than one having such jurisdiction and the Magistrate acting under this 
section cannot satisfy himself as to the Magistrate to or before whom such person should be sent or bound to appear, 
the case shall be reported for the orders of the High Court.                                                                             
188. Offence committed outside India.—When an offence is committed outside India— 
(a) by a citizen of India, whether on the high seas or elsewhere; or 
(b) by a person, not being such citizen, on any ship or aircraft registered in India, 
he may be dealt with in respect of such offence as if it had been committed at any place within India at which he 
may be found: 
Provided that, notwithstanding anything in any of the preceding sections of this Chapter, no such offence shall 
be inquired into or tried in India except with the previous sanction of the Central Government. 
189. Receipt of evidence relating to offences committed outside India.—When any offence alleged to have 
been committed in a territory outside India is being inquired into or tried under the provisions of section 188, the 
Central Government may, if it thinks fit, direct that copies of depositions made or exhibits produced before a 
Judicial officer in or for that territory or before a diplomatic or consular representative of India in or for that territory 
shall be received as evidence by the Court holding such inquiry or trial in any case in which such Court might issue 
a commission for taking evidence as to the matters to which such depositions or exhibits relate. 
CHAPTER XIV 
CONDITIONS REQUISITE FOR INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS 
190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of 
the first class, and any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf under sub-section (2), may 
take cognizance of any offence— 
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such offence; 
(b) upon a police report of such facts; 
(c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that 
such offence has been committed. 

97 
 
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under 
sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his competence to inquire into or try. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Maharashtra  
Amendment of section 190.- In section 190 of the said Code, in sub-section (1), after clause (c), following 
provisos shall be added, namely:— 
“Provided that, no Magistrate shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by any 
person who is or was a public servant as defined under any other law for the time being in force, while acting or 
purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties, except with the previous sanction under section 197 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or under any law for the time being in force: 
Provided further that, the sanctioning authority shall take a decision within a period of ninety days from the date 
of the receipt of the proposal for sanction and in case the sanctioning authority fails to take the decision within the 
said stipulated period of ninety days, the sanction shall be deemed to have been accorded by the sanctioning 
authority.”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 33 of 2016, s. 3.] 
Assam 
In Section 190 of the Code, in sub-section (1), after the words “any Magistrate of  the first class” the words 
“any Executive Magistrate” shall be inserted; 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3(3) and the Schedule.] 
191. Transfer on application of the accused.—When a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence under 
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 190, the accused shall, before any evidence is taken, be informed that he is 
entitled to have the case inquired into or tried by another Magistrate, and if the accused or any of the accused, if 
there be more than one, objects to further proceedings before the Magistrate taking cognizance, the case shall be 
transferred to such other Magistrate as may be specified by the Chief Judicial Magistrate in this behalf. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Assam 
In Section 191 of the Code, the reference to “Chief Judicial Magistrate” Shall, in relation to an offence taken 
cognizance of by an Executive Magistrate, be construed as a reference to the District Magistrate.  
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3(3) and the Schedule.] 
192. Making over of cases to Magistrates.—(1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking cognizance of 
an offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial to any competent Magistrate subordinate to him. 
(2) Any Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate may, after taking 
cognizance of an offence, make over the case for inquiry or trial to such other competent Magistrate as the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the inquiry or 
trial. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Assam 
In Section 192 of the Code:— 
(i) in sub-section (1), after the word “Any” the words “District Magistrate” shall be inserted; 
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be substituted as follows:— 
(2) Any Sub-divisional Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class empowered in this behalf  by District 

98 
 
Magistrate or Chief  Judicial Magistrate, as the case may be, may, after taking cognizance of an offence, make 
over the case for enquiry or trial to such other competent  Magistrate as the District Magistrate or  Chief Judicial 
Magistrate may, by general or special order, specify, and thereupon such Magistrate may hold the enquiry or 
trail. 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3(3) and the Schedule.] 
193. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session.—Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code or 
by any other law for the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence as a Court of 
original jurisdiction unless the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate under this Code. 
194. Additional and Assistant Sessions Judges to try cases made over to them.—As Additional Sessions 
Judge or Assistant Sessions Judge shall try such cases as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or 
special order, make over to him for trial or as the High Court may, by special order, direct him to try. 
195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences against public justice 
and for offences relating to documents given in evidence.—(1) No Court shall take cognizance— 
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 172 to 188 (both inclusive) of the Indian Penal Code,            
(45 of 1860), or 
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or 
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, 
except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public servant to whom he is 
administratively subordinate; 
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
namely, sections 193 to 196 (both inclusive), 199, 200, 205 to 211 (both inclusive) and 228, when such offence 
is alleged to have been committed in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any Court, or 
(ii) of any offence described in section 463, or punishable under section 471, section 475 or section 476, of 
the said Code, when such offence is alleged to have been committed in respect of a document produced or given 
in evidence in a proceeding in any Court, or 
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment of, any offence specified 
in sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii), 
1[except on the complaint in writing of that Court or by such officer of the Court as that Court may authorise in 
writing in this behalf, or of some other Court to which that Court is subordinate.] 
(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant under clause (a) of sub-section (1) any authority to 
which he is administratively subordinate may order the withdrawal of the complaint and send a copy of such order to 
the Court; and upon its receipt by the Court, no further proceedings shall be taken on the complaint: 
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the Court of first instance has been concluded. 
(3) In clause (b) of sub-section (1), the term “Court” means a Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court, and includes a 
tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the 
purposes of this section. 
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1), a Court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Court to 
which appeals ordinarily lie from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former Court, or in the case of a Civil 
Court from whose decrees no appeal ordinarily lies, to the Principal Court having ordinary original civil jurisdiction 
within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court is situate: 
Provided that— 
(a) where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of inferior jurisdiction shall be the Court 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 16-4-2006). 

99 
 
to which such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate; 
(b) where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue Court, such Court shall be deemed to be subordinate 
to the Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the case or proceeding in connection with which the 
offence is alleged to have been committed. 
1[195A. Procedure for witnesses in case of threatening, etc.—A witness or any other person may file a 
complaint in relation to an offence under section 195A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
196. Prosecution for offences against the State and for criminal conspiracy to commit such offence.—(1) 
No Court shall take cognizance of— 
(a) any offence punishable under Chapter VI or under section 153A, 2[section 295A or sub-section (1) of 
section 505] of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or 
(b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, or 
(c) any such abetment, as is described in section 108A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860),  
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government. 
3[(1A) No Court shall take cognizance of— 
(a) any offence punishable under section 153B or sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 505 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or 
(b) a criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, 
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of the State Government or of the District 
Magistrate.] 
(2) No Court shall take cognizance of the offence of any criminal conspiracy punishable under section 120B of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), other than a criminal conspiracy to commit 4[an offence] punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a term of two years or upwards, unless the State Government or 
the District Magistrate has consented in writing to the initiation of the proceedings: 
Provided that where the criminal conspiracy is one to which the provisions of section 195 apply, no such 
consent shall be necessary. 
 (3) The Central Government or the State Government may, before according sanction 5[under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (1A) and the District Magistrate may, before according sanction under sub-section (1A)]  and the  
State Government or the District Magistrate may, before  giving consent under sub-section (2), order a preliminary 
investigation by a police officer not being below the rank of Inspector, in which case such police officer shall have 
the powers referred to in sub-section (3) of section 155. 
197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants.—(1) When any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate 
or a public servant not removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Government is accused of any 
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, 
no Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction 6[save as otherwise provided in the 
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013 (1 of 2014)]— 
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the 
alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of the Union, of the Central Government; 
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may be, was at the time of commission of the 
alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of the State Government: 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.17 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 
2. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 3, for “section 153B, section 295A or section 505” (w.e.f. 23-9-1980).  
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-9-1980). 
4. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 16, for “a cognizable offence”  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
5.  Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 3, for “under sub-section (1)” (w.e.f. 23-9-1980). 
6. Ins. by Act 1 of 2014, s. 58 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 16-1-2014).  

100 
 
1[Provided that where the alleged offence was committed by a person referred to in clause (b) during the period 
while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force in a State, clause (b) will 
apply as if for the expression “State Government” occurring therein, the expression “Central Government” were 
substituted.] 
2[Explanation.—For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that no sanction shall be required in case of a 
public servant accused of any offence alleged to have been committed under section 166A, section 166B,                
section 354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 370, section 375, 3[section 376A, 
section 376AB, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB] or section 509 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).] 
 (2) No Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by any member of the 
Armed Forces of the Union while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, except with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government. 
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply to such 
class or category of the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order as may be specified 
therein, wherever they may be serving, and thereupon the provisions of that sub-section will apply as if for the 
expression “Central Government” occurring therein, the expression “State Government” were substituted. 
4[(3A)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), no court shall take cognizance of any offence, 
alleged to have been committed by any member of the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order in a 
State while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty during the period while a Proclamation 
issued under clause (1) of article 356 of the Constitution was in force therein, except with the previous sanction of 
the Central Government. 
(3B) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code or any other law, it is hereby declared that any 
sanction accorded by the State Government or any cognizance taken by a court upon such sanction, during the period 
commencing  on the 20th day of August, 1991 and ending with the date immediately preceding the date on which the 
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1991 (43 of 1991), receives the assent of the President, with respect to an 
offence alleged to have been committed during the period while a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of article 356 of 
the Constitution was in force in the State, shall be invalid and it shall be competent for the Central Government in such 
matter to accord sanction and for the court to take cognizance thereon.] 
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may determine the person by whom, 
the manner in which, and the offence or offences for which, the prosecution of such Judge, Magistrate or public 
servant is to be conducted, and may specify the Court before which the trial is to be held. 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Tripura. — 
Insertion of a new Section 197(IA).—In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in section 197 after                 
sub-section (I) the following sub-section shall be inserted, only for application in the State of Tripura, 
namely:— 
“(IA) When as per provision of any relevant law for the time being in force a public servant referred 
to in Sub-Section (1) (b) is directly appointed, transferred or posted by the State Government in any local 
or other authorities including a Government Company, Corporation or Public Sector Undertaking, he 
shall be deemed to be employed in connection with the affairs of the State and no Court shall take 
cognizance of any offence as referred to in Sub-Section (I) without previous sanction of the State 
Government. 
[Vide Tripura Act 6 of 2003, s. 2] 
 
                                                 
1. Added by Act 43 of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2-5-1991).  
2. Explanation ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 18 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 15, for “section 376A, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2-5-1991).  

101 
 
Assam.— 
In Section 197 of the Code. — 
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “in the discharge of” the words “in or in connection with 
the discharge of” shall be substituted; 
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “in the discharge of” the words “in or in connection with 
the discharge of” shall be substituted; 
(c) after sub-section (4), the fallowing subsections shall be inserted, namely: — 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code,— 
(a) where a complaint is made to a Court against a public servant belonging to any class or 
category specified under sub-section (3) alleging that he has committed an offence, the Court shall 
postpone the issue of process against the accused and make a reference to the State Government; or 
(b) where an accused, either by himself or through a pleader, claims before a Court that he 
belongs to any class or category specified under sub-section (3) and that the offence alleged to have 
been committed by him arose out of any action taken by him while acting or purporting to act in or 
in connection with the discharge of his official duty, the Court shall forthwith stay further 
proceedings and make a reference to the State Government. 
(6) (i) Where a reference is received from a Court under sub-section (5), the State Government 
shall issue a certificate to the Court that the accused person was or was not acting or purporting to act 
in, or in connection with the discharge of his official duty. 
(ii) If the State Government certifies that the accused was acting or purporting to act in or in 
connection with the discharge of his official duty, the Court shall dismiss the complaint or 
discharge the accused: 
Provided that the complainant may, within sixty days from the date of the issue of such 
certificate prefer an appeal to the High Court against the Certificate: 
Provided further that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period 
of sixty days if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring 
the appeal within the said period. 
(iii) If the State Government certifies that the accused was not acting or purporting to act in or in 
connection with, the discharge of his official duty, the Court may proceed further with the 
complaint in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(7) The provisions of sub-sections (5) and (6) shall apply to all proceedings pending on the date of 
commencement of this Act in respect of which a Court had taken cognizance of an offence in 
accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 4.] 
198. Prosecution for offences against marriage.—(1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence 
punishable under Chapter XX of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some person 
aggrieved by the offence: 
Provided that— 
(a) where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or 
infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not 
to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his 
or her behalf; 
(b) where such person is the husband and he is serving in any of the Armed Forces of the Union under 
conditions which are certified by his Commanding Officer as precluding him from obtaining leave of absence to 
enable him to make a complaint in person, some other person authorised by the husband in accordance with the 
provisions of sub-section (4) may make a complaint on his behalf; 

102 
 
(c) where the person aggrieved by an offence punishable under 1[section 494 or section 495] of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) is the wife, complaint may be made on her behalf by her father, mother, brother, sister, 
son or daughter or by her father’s or mother’s brother or sister  2[, or, with the leave of the Court, by any other 
person related to her by blood, marriage or adoption].   
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), no person other than the husband of the woman shall be deemed to be 
aggrieved by any offence punishable under section 497 or section 498 of the said Code: 
Provided that in the absence of the husband, some person who had care of the woman on his behalf at the time 
when such offence was committed may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his behalf. 
(3) When in any case falling under clause (a) of the proviso to sub-section (1), the complaint is sought to be 
made on behalf of a person under the age of eighteen years or of a lunatic by a person who has not been appointed or 
declared by a competent authority to be the guardian of the person of the minor or lunatic, and the Court is satisfied 
that there is a guardian so appointed or declared, the Court shall, before granting the application for leave, cause 
notice to be given to such guardian and give him a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(4) The authorisation referred to in clause (b) of the proviso to sub-section (1), shall be in writing, shall be 
signed or otherwise attested by the husband, shall contain a statement to the effect that he has been informed of the 
allegations upon which the complaint is to be founded, shall be countersigned by his Commanding Officer, and shall 
be accompanied by a certificate signed by that Officer to the effect that leave of absence for the purpose of making a 
complaint in person cannot for the time being be granted to the husband. 
(5) Any document purporting to be such an authorisation and complying with the provisions of sub-section (4), 
and any document purporting to be a certificate required by that sub-section shall, unless the contrary is proved, be 
presumed to be genuine and shall be received in evidence. 
(6) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860), where such offence consists of sexual intercourse by a man with his own wife, the wife being 
under 3[eighteen years of age], if more than one year has elapsed from the date of the commission of the 
offence. 
(7) The provisions of this section apply to the abetment of, or attempt to commit, an offence as they 
apply to the offence. 
4[198A. Prosecution of offences under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code.—No Court shall 
take cognizance of an offence punishable under section 498A of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
except upon a police report of facts which constitute such offence or upon a complaint made by  the  
person  aggrieved  by  the offence or by her father, mother, brother, sister or by her father’s or mother’s 
brother or sister or, with the leave of the Court, by any other person related to her by blood, marriage or 
adoption.] 
5[198B. Cognizance of offence.—No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under 
section 376B of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) where the persons are in a marital relationship, 
except upon prima facie satisfaction of the facts which constitute the offence upon a complaint having 
been filed or made by the wife against the husband.] 
199. Prosecution for defamation.—(1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable 
under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some person 
aggrieved by the offence: 
Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is 
from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 17, for “section 494” (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
2. Ins. by s. 17,  ibid. (w.e.f.  18-12-1978). 
3. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 18, for “fifteen years of age”  (w.e.f. 31-12-2009)  
4. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 5 (w.e.f. 25-12-1983). 
5. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 19 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  

103 
 
and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the 
Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, when any offence falling under Chapter XXI of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed against a person who, at the time of 
such commission, is the President of India, the Vice-President of India, the Governor of a State, the 
Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union territory, or any 
other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his 
conduct in the discharge of his public functions a Court of Session may take cognizance of such offence, 
without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing made by the Public Prosecutor. 
 (3) Every complaint referred to in sub-section (2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the offence 
alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are reasonably sufficient to give notice to 
the accused of the offence alleged to have been committed by him. 
(4) No complaint under sub-section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the 
previous sanction— 
(a) of the State Government, in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State 
or a Minister of that Government; 
(b) of the State Government, in the case of any other public servant employed in connection with 
the affairs of the State; 
(c) of the Central Government, in any other case. 
(5) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence under sub-section (2) unless the 
complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed. 
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the offence is alleged to 
have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence before a Magistrate having 
jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence upon such complaint. 
CHAPTER XV 
COMPLAINTS TO MAGISTRATES 
200. Examination of complainant.—A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on complaint 
shall examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and the substance of such 
examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant and the witnesses, and 
also by the Magistrate: 
Provided that, when the complaint is made in writing, the Magistrate need not examine the 
complainant and the witnesses— 
(a) if a public servant acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties or a Court 
has made the complaint; or 
(b) if the Magistrate makes over the case for inquiry or trial to another Magistrate under                 
section 192: 
Provided further that if the Magistrate makes over the case to another Magistrate under section 192 
after examining the complainant and the witnesses, the latter Magistrate need not re-examine them. 
201. Procedure by Magistrate not competent to take cognizance of the case.—If the complaint is 

104 
 
made to a Magistrate who is not competent to take cognizance of the offence, he shall,— 
(a) if the complaint is in writing, return it for presentation to the proper Court with an 
endorsement to that effect; 
(b) if the complaint is not in writing, direct the complainant to the proper Court. 
202. Postponement of issue of process.—(1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence 
of which he is authorised to take cognizance or which has been made over to him under section 192, may, 
if he thinks fit, 1[and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he 
exercises his jurisdiction,] postpone the issue of process against the accused, and either inquire into the 
case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks 
fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding: 
Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be made,—   
(a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable exclusively by the 
Court of Session; or 
 (b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the complainant and the witnesses 
present (if any) have been examined on oath under section 200. 
(2) In an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, take evidence of witnesses 
on oath: 
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained of is triable exclusively by 
the Court of Session, he shall call upon the complainant to produce all his witnesses and examine them on 
oath. 
(3) If an investigation under sub-section (1) is made by a person not being a police officer, he shall 
have for that investigation all the powers conferred by this Code on an officer in charge of a police station 
except the power to arrest without warrant. 
203. Dismissal of complaint.—If, after considering the statements on oath (if any) of the 
complainant and of the witnesses and the result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 202, 
the Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall dismiss the 
complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly record his reasons for so doing. 
 
CHAPTER XVI 
COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE MAGISTRATES 
204. Issue of process.—(1) If in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence there is 
sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be— 
(a) a summons-case, he shall issue his summons for the attendance of the accused, or 
(b) a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused 
to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such Magistrate or (if he has no jurisdiction 
himself) some other Magistrate having jurisdiction. 
(2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused under sub-section (1) until a list of the 
prosecution witnesses has been filed. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 19 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

105 
 
(3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing, every summons or warrant issued 
under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint. 
(4) When by any law for the time being in force any process-fees or other fees are payable, no process 
shall be issued until the fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid within a reasonable time, the 
Magistrate may dismiss the complaint. 
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of section 87. 
205. Magistrate may dispense with personal attendance of accused.—(1) Whenever a Magistrate 
issues a summons, he may, if he sees reason so to do, dispense with the personal attendance of the 
accused and permit him to appear by his pleader. 
 (2) But the Magistrate inquiring into or trying the case may, in his discretion, at any stage of the 
proceedings, direct the personal attendance of the accused, and, if necessary, enforce such attendance in 
the manner hereinbefore provided. 
206. Special summons in cases of petty offence.—(1) If, in the opinion of a Magistrate taking 
cognizance of a petty offence, the case may be summarily disposed of under section 260 1[or section 261], 
the Magistrate shall, except where he is, for reasons to be recorded in writing of a contrary opinion, issue 
summons to the accused requiring him either to appear in person or by pleader before the Magistrate on a 
specified date, or if he desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, to 
transmit before the specified date, by post or by messenger to the Magistrate, the said plea in writing and 
the amount of fine specified in the summons or if he desires to appear by pleader and to plead guilty to 
the charge through such pleader, to authorise, in writing, the pleader to plead guilty to the charge on his 
behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader: 
Provided that the amount of the fine specified in such summons shall not exceed 2[one thousand 
rupees]. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, “petty offence” means any offence punishable only with fine 
not exceeding one thousand rupees, but does not include any offence so punishable under the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939)3, or under any other law which provides for convicting the accused 
person in his absence on a plea of guilty. 
4[(3) The State Government may, by notification, specially empower any Magistrate to exercise 
the powers conferred by sub-section (1) in relation to any offence which is compoundable under 
section 320 or any offence punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, or 
with fine, or with both where the Magistrate is of opinion that, having regard to the facts and 
circumstances of the case, the imposition of fine only would meet the ends of justice.] 
207. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents.—In any case where 
the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, the Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the 
accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the following:— 
(i) the police report; 
(ii) the first information report recorded under section 154; 
(iii) the statements recorded under sub-section (3) of section 161 of all persons whom the 
prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses, excluding therefrom any part in regard to 
which a request for such exclusion has been made by the police officer under sub-section (6) of 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 20 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Subs. by,  s. 20, ibid.,  for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
3. Now the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988).  
4. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 18 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

106 
 
section 173; 
(iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under section 164; 
(v) any other document or relevant extract thereof forwarded to the Magistrate with the police 
report under sub-section (5) of section 173: 
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of a statement as is referred to in            
clause  (iii) and considering the reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct that a copy 
of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the Magistrate thinks proper, shall be 
furnished to the accused: 
Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any document referred to in clause (v) is 
voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only 
be allowed to inspect it either personally or through pleader in Court. 
208. Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in other cases triable by 
Court of Session.—Where, in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it appears to the 
Magistrate issuing process under section 204 that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of 
Session, the Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the 
following:— 
(i) the statements recorded under section 200 or section 202, of all persons examined by the 
Magistrate; 
(ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded under section 161 or section 164; 
(iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate on which the prosecution proposes to 
rely: 
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such document is voluminous, he shall, instead 
of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it either 
personally or through pleader in Court. 
209. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable exclusively by it.—When in 
a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate 
and it appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he shall— 
1[(a) commit, after complying with the provisions of section 207 or section 208, as the case may 
be, the case to the Court of Session, and subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand 
the accused to custody until such commitment has been made;] 
(b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused to custody during, 
and until the conclusion of, the trial; 
(c) send to that Court the record of the case and the documents and articles, if any, which are to 
be produced in evidence; 
(d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the case to the Court of Session. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Gujarat 
In section 209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in its application to the State of Gujarat, for 
clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(a) Commit the case, after complying with the provisions of section 207 or section 208, as the case 
may be, to the Court of Session and, subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the accused 
to custody until such commitment has been made”. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 30 of 1976, s. 2] 
210. Procedure to be followed when there is a complaint case and police investigation in respect 
of the same offence.—(1) When in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report (hereinafter 
referred to as a complaint case), it is made to appear to the Magistrate, during the course of the inquiry or 
trial held by him, that an investigation by the police is in progress in relation to the offence which is the 
subject-matter of the inquiry or trial held by him, the Magistrate shall stay the proceedings of such inquiry 
or trial and call for a report on the matter from the police officer conducting the investigation. 
(2) If a report is made by the investigating police officer under section 173 and on such report 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 19, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

107 
 
cognizance of any offence is taken by the Magistrate against any person who is an accused in the 
complaint case, the Magistrate shall inquire into or try together the complaint case and the case arising out 
of the police report as if both the cases were instituted on a police report. 
(3) If the police report does not relate to any accused in the complaint case or if the Magistrate does 
not take cognizance of any offence on the police report, he shall proceed with the inquiry or trial, which 
was stayed by him, in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
CHAPTER XVII 
THE CHARGE 
A.—Form of charges 
211. Contents of charge.—(1) Every charge under this Code shall state the offence with which the 
accused is charged. 
 (2) If the law which creates the offence gives it any specific name, the offence may be described in 
the charge by that name only. 
(3) If the law which creates the offence does not give it any specific name, so much of the definition 
of the offence must be stated as to give the accused notice of the matter with which he is charged. 
(4) The law and section of the law against which the offence is said to have been committed shall be 
mentioned in the charge. 
(5) The fact that the charge is made is equivalent to a statement that every legal condition required by 
law to constitute the offence charged was fulfilled in the particular case. 
(6) The charge shall be written in the language of the Court. 
(7) If the accused, having been previously convicted of any offence, is liable, by reason of such 
previous conviction, to enhanced punishment, or to punishment of a different kind, for a subsequent 
offence, and it is intended to prove such previous conviction for the purpose of affecting the punishment 
which the Court may think fit to award for the subsequent offence, the fact, date and place of the previous 
conviction shall be stated in the charge; and if such statement has been omitted, the Court may add it at 
any time before sentence is passed. 
Illustrations 
(a) A is charged with the murder of B. This is equivalent to a statement that A's act fell within the definition of murder 
given in sections 299 and 300 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); that it did not fall within any of the general exceptions 
of the said Code; and that it did not fall within any of the five exceptions to section 300, or that, if it did fall within 
Exception 1, one or other of the three provisos to that exception applied to it. 
(b) A is charged under section 326 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B 
by means of an instrument for shooting. This is equivalent to a statement that the case was not provided for by section 335 
of the said Code, and that the general exceptions did not apply to it. 
(c) A is accused of murder, cheating, theft, extortion, adultery or criminal intimidation, or using a false property-mark. 
The charge may state that A committed murder, or cheating, or theft, or extortion, or adultery, or criminal intimidation, or 
that he used a false property-mark, without reference to the definitions, of those crimes contained in the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860); but the sections under which the offence is punishable must, in each instance be referred to in the charge. 
(d) A is charged under section 184 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) with intentionally obstructing a sale of 
property offered for sale by the lawful authority of a public servant. The charge should be in those words. 
212. Particulars as to time, place and person.—(1) The charge shall contain such particulars as to 
the time and place of the alleged offence, and the person (if any) against whom, or the thing (if any) in 

108 
 
respect of which, it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to give the accused notice of the matter 
with which he is charged. 
(2) When the accused is charged with criminal breach of trust or dishonest misappropriation of money 
or other movable property, it shall be sufficient to specify the gross sum or, as the case may be, describe 
the movable property in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed, and the dates 
between which the offence is alleged to have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact 
dates, and the charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of 
section 219: 
Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates shall not exceed one year. 
213. When manner of committing offence must be stated.—When the nature of the case is such 
that the particulars mentioned in sections 211 and 212 do not give the accused sufficient notice of the 
matter with which he is charged, the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in which the 
alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for that purpose. 
Illustrations 
(a) A is accused of the theft of a certain article at a certain time and place. The charge need not set out the manner in 
which the theft was effected. 
(b) A is accused of cheating B at a given time and place. The charge must set out the manner in which A cheated B. 
 (c) A is accused of giving false evidence at a given time and place. The charge must set out that portion of the 
evidence given by A which is alleged to be false. 
(d) A is accused of obstructing B, a public servant, in the discharge of his public functions at a given time and place. 
The charge must set out the manner in which A obstructed B in the discharge of his functions. 
(e) A is accused of the murder of B at a given time and place. The charge need not state the manner in which A 
murdered B. 
(f) A is accused of disobeying a direction of the law with intent to save B from punishment. The charge must set out the 
disobedience charged and the law infringed. 
214. Words in charge taken in sense of law under which offence is punishable.—In every charge 
words used in describing an offence shall be deemed to have been used in the sense attached to them 
respectively by the law under which such offence is punishable. 
215. Effect of errors.— No error in stating either the offence or the particulars required to be stated 
in the charge, and no omission to state the offence or those particulars, shall be regarded at any  stage of 
the case as material, unless the accused was in fact misled by such error or omission, and it has 
occasioned a failure of justice. 
Illustrations 
(a) A is charged under section 242 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with “having been in possession of 
counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed thereof that such coin was counterfeit,” the word 
“fraudulently” being omitted in the charge. Unless it appears that A was in fact misled by this omission, the error shall not 
be regarded as material. 
(b) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out in the charge or is set out 
incorrectly. A defends himself, calls witnesses and gives his own account of the transaction. The Court may infer from this 
that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating is not material. 
(c) A is charged with cheating B, and the manner in which he cheated B is not set out in the charge. There were many 

109 
 
transactions between A and B, and A had no means of knowing to which of them the charge referred, and offered no 
defence. The Court may infer from such facts that the omission to set out the manner of the cheating was, in the case, a 
material error. 
(d) A is charged with the murder of Khoda Baksh on the 21st January, 1882. In fact, the murdered person's name was 
Haidar Baksh, and the date of the murder was the 20th January, 1882. A was never charged with any murder but one, and 
had heard the inquiry before the Magistrate, which referred exclusively to the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer 
from these facts that A was not misled, and that the error in the charge was immaterial. 
(e) A was charged with murdering Haidar Baksh on the 20th January, 1882, and Khoda Baksh (who tried to arrest him 
for that murder) on the 21st January, 1882. When charged for the murder of Haidar Baksh, he was tried for the murder of 
Khoda Baksh. The witnesses present in his defence were witnesses in the case of Haidar Baksh. The Court may infer from 
this that A was misled, and that the error was material. 
216. Court may alter charge.—(1) Any Court may alter or add to any charge at any time before 
judgment is pronounced. 
(2) Every such alteration or addition shall be read and explained to the accused. 
(3) If the alteration or addition to a charge is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is not 
likely, in the opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused in his defence or the prosecutor in the conduct 
of the case, the Court may, in its discretion, after such alteration or addition has been made, proceed with 
the trial as if the altered or added charge had been the original charge. 
(4) If the alteration or addition is such that proceeding immediately with the trial is likely, in the 
opinion of the Court, to prejudice the accused or the prosecutor as aforesaid, the Court may either direct a 
new trial or adjourn the trial for such period as may be necessary. 
(5) If the offence stated in the altered or added charge is one for the prosecution of which previous 
sanction is necessary, the case shall not be proceeded with until such sanction is obtained, unless sanction 
has been already obtained for a prosecution on the same facts as those on which the altered or added 
charge is founded. 
217. Recall of witnesses when charge altered.—Whenever a charge is altered or added to by the 
Court after the commencement of the trial, the prosecutor and the accused shall be allowed— 
(a) to recall or re-summon, and examine with reference to such alteration or addition, any witness 
who may have been examined, unless the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers that 
the prosecutor or the accused, as the case may be, desires to recall or re-examine such witness for the 
purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice; 
(b) also to call any further witness whom the Court may think to be material. 
B.—Joinder of charges 
218. Separate charges for distinct offences.—(1) For every distinct offence of which any person is 
accused there shall be a separate charge, and every such charge shall be tried separately: 
Provided that where the accused person, by an application in writing, so desires and the Magistrate is 
of opinion that such person is not likely to be prejudiced thereby, the Magistrate may try together all or 
any number of the charges framed against such person. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall affect the operation of the provisions of sections 219, 220, 221 
and 223. 

110 
 
Illustration 
A is accused of a theft on one occasion, and of causing grievous hurt on another occasion. A must be separately charged and 
separately tried for the theft and causing grievous hurt. 
219. Three offences of same kind within year may be charged together.—(1) When a person is 
accused of more offences than one of the same kind committed within the space of twelve months from 
the first to the last of such offences, whether in respect of the same person or not, he may be charged with, 
and tried at one trial for, any number of them not exceeding three. 
(2) Offences are of the same kind when they are punishable with the same amount of punishment 
under the same section of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or of any special or local law: 
Provided that, for the purposes of this section, an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an offence punishable 
under section 380 of the said Code, and that an offence punishable under any section of the said Code, or 
of any special or local law, shall be deemed to be an offence of the same kind as an attempt to commit 
such offence, when such an attempt is an offence. 
220. Trial for more than one offence.—(1) If, in one series of acts so connected together as to form 
the same transaction, more offences than one are committed by the same person, he may be charged with, 
and tried at one trial for, every such offence. 
(2) When a person charged with one or more offences of criminal breach of trust or dishonest 
misappropriation of property as provided in sub-section (2) of section 212 or in sub-section (1) of section 
219, is accused of committing, for the purpose of facilitating or concealing the commission of that offence 
or those offences, one or more offences of falsification of accounts, he may be charged with, and tried at 
one trial for, every such offence. 
(3) If the acts alleged constitute an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law 
in force for the time being by which offences are defined or punished, the person accused of them may be 
charged with, and tried at one trial for, each of such offences. 
(4) If several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an offence, 
constitute when combined a different offence, the person accused of them may be charged with, and tried 
at one trial for the offence constituted by such acts when combined, and for any offence constituted by 
any one, or more, of such acts. 
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall affect section 71 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
Illustrations to sub-section (1) 
(a) A rescues B, a person in lawful custody, and in so doing causes grievous hurt to C, a constable in whose custody B 
was. A may be charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 225 and 333 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(b) A commits house-breaking by day with intent to commit adultery, and commits, in the house so entered, adultery 
with B's wife. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 454 and 497 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860). 
(c) A entices B, the wife of C, away from C, with intent to commit adultery with B, and then commits adultery with 
her. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 498 and 497 of the Indian Penal Code         
(45 of 1860). 
(d) A has in his possession several seals, knowing them to be counterfeit and intending to use them for the purpose of 
committing several forgeries punishable under section 466 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). A may be separately 

111 
 
charged with, and convicted of, the possession of each seal under section 473 of the Indian Penal Code. 
(e) With intent to cause injury to B, A institutes a criminal proceeding against him, knowing that there is no just or 
lawful ground for such proceeding, and also falsely accuses B of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just 
or lawful ground for such charge. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, two offences under section 211 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(f) A, with intent to cause injury to B, falsely accuses him of having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just 
or lawful ground for such charge. On the trial, A gives false evidence against B, intending thereby to cause B to be 
convicted of a capital offence. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 211 and 194 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(g) A, with six others, commits the offences of rioting, grievous hurt and assaulting a public servant endeavouring in 
the discharge of his duty as such to suppress the riot. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under 
sections 147, 325 and 152 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
 (h) A threatens B, C and D at the same time with injury to their persons with intent to cause alarm to them. A may be 
separately charged with, and convicted of, each of the three offences under section 506 of the Indian Penal Code                         
(45 of 1860). 
The separate charges referred to in illustrations (a) to (h), respectively, may be tried at the same time. 
Illustrations to sub-section (3) 
(i) A wrongfully strikes B with a cane. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 
352 and 323 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(j) Several stolen sacks of corn are made over to A and B, who knew they are stolen property, for the purpose of 
concealing them. A and B thereupon voluntarily assist each other to conceal the sacks at the bottom of a grain-pit. A and B 
may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 411 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code                    
(45 of 1860). 
(k) A exposes her child with the knowledge that she is thereby likely to cause its death. The child dies in consequence of 
such exposure. A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences under sections 317 and 304 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860). 
(l) A dishonestly uses a forged document as genuine evidence, in order to convict B, a public servant, of an offence 
under section 167 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). A may be separately charged with, and convicted of, offences 
under sections 471 (read with section 466) and 196 of that Code. 
Illustration to sub-section (4) 
(m) A commits robbery on B, and in doing so voluntarily causes hurt to him. A may be separately charged with, and 
convicted of, offences under sections 323, 392 and 394 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
221. Where it is doubtful what offence has been committed.—(1) If a single act or series of acts is 
of such a nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts which can be proved will constitute, 
the accused may be charged with having committed all or any of such offences, and any number of such 
charges may be tried at once; or he may be charged in the alternative with having committed some one of 
the said offences. 
(2) If in such a case the accused is charged with one offence, and it appears in evidence that he 
committed a different offence for which he might have been charged under the provisions of sub-section 
(1), he may be convicted of the offence which he is shown to have committed, although he was not 
charged with it. 
Illustrations 
(a) A is accused of an act which may amount to theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating. He 
may be charged with theft, receiving stolen property, criminal breach of trust and cheating, or he may be charged with having 
committed theft, or receiving stolen property, or criminal breach of trust or cheating. 
(b) In the case mentioned, A is only charged with theft. It appears that he committed the offence of criminal breach of trust, or 

112 
 
that of receiving stolen goods. He may be convicted of criminal breach of trust or of receiving stolen goods (as the case may be), 
though he was not charged with such offence. 
(c) A states on oath before the Magistrate that he saw B hit C with a club. Before the Sessions Court A states on oath that B 
never hit C. A may be charged in the alternative and convicted of  intentionally giving false evidence, although it cannot be proved 
which of these contradictory statements was false. 
222. When offence proved included in offence charged.—(1) When a person is charged with an 
offence consisting of several particulars, a combination of some only of which constitutes a complete 
minor offence, and such combination is proved, but the remaining particulars are not proved, he may be 
convicted of the minor offence, though he was not charged with it. 
(2) When a person is charged with an offence and facts are proved which reduce it to a minor offence, 
he may be convicted of the minor offence, although he is not charged with it. 
(3) When a person is charged with an offence, he may be convicted of an attempt to commit such 
offence although the attempt is not separately charged. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a conviction of any minor offence where the 
conditions requisite for the initiation of proceedings in respect of that minor offence have not been 
satisfied.  
Illustrations 
(a) A is charged, under section 407 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with criminal breach of trust in respect of 
property entrusted to him as a carrier. It appears, that he did commit criminal breach of trust under section 406 of that Code 
in respect of the property, but that it was not entrusted to him as a carrier. He may be convicted of criminal breach of trust 
under the said section 406. 
(b) A is charged, under section 325 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), with causing grievous hurt. He proves that 
he acted on grave and sudden provocation. He may be convicted under section 335 of that Code. 
223. What persons may be charged jointly.—The following persons may be charged and tried 
together, namely:— 
(a) persons accused of the same offence committed in the course of the same transaction; 
(b) persons accused of an offence and persons accused of abetment of, or attempt to commit, such 
offence; 
(c) persons accused of more than one offence of the same kind, within the meaning of section 219 
committed by them jointly within the period of twelve months; 
(d) persons accused of different offences committed in the course of the same transaction; 
(e) persons accused of an offence which includes theft, extortion, cheating, or criminal 
misappropriation, and persons accused of receiving or retaining, or assisting in the disposal or 
concealment of, property possession of which is alleged to have been transferred by any such offence 
committed by the first-named persons, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such last-
named offence; 

113 
 
(f) persons accused of offences under sections 411 and 414 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
or either of those sections in respect of stolen property the possession of which has been transferred 
by one offence; 
(g) persons accused of any offence under Chapter XII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) 
relating to counterfeit coin and persons accused of any other offence under the said Chapter relating 
to the same coin, or of abetment of or attempting to commit any such offence; and the provisions 
contained in the former part of this Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to all such charges: 
Provided that where a number of persons are charged with separate offences and such persons do not 
fall within any of the categories specified in this section, the 1[Magistrate or Court of Session] may, if 
such persons by an application in writing, so desire, and 2[if he or it is satisfied] that such persons would 
not be prejudicially affected thereby, and it is expedient so to do, try all such persons together. 
224. Withdrawal of remaining charges on conviction on one of several charges.—When a charge 
containing more heads than one is framed against the same person, and when a conviction has been had 
on one or more of them, the complainant, or the officer conducting the prosecution, may, with the consent 
of the Court, withdraw the remaining charge or charges, or the Court of its own accord may stay the 
inquiry into, or trial of, such charge or charges and such withdrawal shall have the effect of an acquittal 
on such charge or charges, unless the conviction be set aside, in which case the said Court (subject to the 
order of the Court setting aside the conviction) may proceed with the inquiry into, or trial of, the charge or 
charges so withdrawn. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
TRIAL BEFORE A COURT OF SESSION 
225. Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor.—In every trial before a Court of Session, the 
prosecution shall be conducted by a Public Prosecutor. 
226. Opening case for prosecution.—When the accused appears or is brought before the Court in 
pursuance of a commitment of the case under section 209, the prosecutor shall open his case by 
describing the charge brought against the accused and stating by what evidence he proposes to prove the 
guilt of the accused. 
227. Discharge.—If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted 
therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge 
considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the 
accused and record his reasons for so doing. 
228. Framing of charge.—(1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of 
opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence which— 
 (a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge against the accused 
and, by order, transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, 3[or any other Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class and direct the accused to appear before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or, 
as the case may be, the Judicial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as he deems fit, and 
thereupon such Magistrate] shall try the offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 21, for “Magistrate” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
3. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

114 
 
warrant-cases instituted on a police report; 
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused. 
(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the charge shall be read 
and explained to the accused and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence 
charged or claims to be tried.  
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In sub-section (2) of section 228 of the Principal Act, after the word “to the accused” the following shall be 
added, namely: — 
“present in person of through the medium of electronic video linkage and being represented by his pleader in the 
Court.” 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 13 of 2006, s. 4.] 
Karnataka 
Amendment of section 228.- In section 228 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 
of 1974), in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the words “to the Chief Judicial Magistrate and thereupon 
the Chief Judicial Magistrate” the words “to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to any Judicial Magistrate 
competent to try the case and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate or such other Judicial magistrate to 
whom the case may have been transferred” shall be substituted. 
[Vide  Karnataka Act 22 of 1994, s. 2.] 
West Bengal 
In section 228 of the said Code, in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 228, for the words “to the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, and thereupon the Chief Judicial Magistrate” the words “to the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or to any Judicial Magistrate competent to try the case, and thereupon the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate or such other Judicial Magistrate to whom the case may have been transferred” shall be 
substituted. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 63 of 1978, s. 3.] 
229. Conviction on plea of guilty.—If the accused pleads guilty, the Judge shall record the plea and may, in his 
discretion, convict him thereon. 
230. Date for prosecution evidence.—If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead, or claims to be tried or 
is not convicted under section 229, the Judge shall fix a date for the examination of witnesses, and may, on the 
application of the prosecution, issue any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the production of 
any document or other thing. 
231. Evidence for prosecution.—(1) On the date so fixed, the Judge shall proceed to take all such evidence as 
may be produced in support of the prosecution. 
(2) The Judge may, in his discretion, permit the cross-examination of any witness to be deferred until any other 
witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for further cross-examination. 
232. Acquittal.—If, after taking the evidence for the prosecution, examining the accused and hearing the 
prosecution and the defence on the point, the Judge considers that there is no evidence that the accused committed 
the offence, the Judge shall record an order of acquittal. 
233. Entering upon defence.—(1) Where the accused is not acquitted under section 232, he shall be called 
upon to enter on his defence and adduce any evidence he may have in support thereof. 

115 
 
(2) If the accused puts in any written statement, the Judge shall file it with the record. 
(3) If the accused applies for the issue of any process for compelling the attendance of any witness or the 
production of any document or thing, the Judge shall issue such process unless he considers, for reasons to be 
recorded, that such application should be refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay 
or for defeating the ends of justice. 
234. Arguments.—When the examination of the witnesses (if any) for the defence is complete, the prosecutor 
shall sum up his case and the accused or his pleader shall be entitled to reply: 
Provided that where any point of law is raised by the accused or his pleader, the prosecution may, with the 
permission of the Judge, make his submissions with regard to such point of law. 
235. Judgment of acquittal or conviction.—(1) After hearing arguments and points of law (if any), the Judge 
shall give a judgment in the case. 
(2) If the accused is convicted, the Judge shall, unless he proceeds in accordance with the provisions of             
section 360, hear the accused on the questions of sentence, and then pass sentence on him according to law. 
236. Previous conviction.—In a case where a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of              
sub-section (7) of section 211, and the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as alleged in 
the charge, the Judge may, after he has convicted the said accused under section 229 or section 235, take evidence in 
respect of the alleged previous conviction, and shall record a finding thereon: 
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Judge nor shall the accused be asked to plead thereto nor 
shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until the 
accused has been convicted under section 229 or section 235. 
237. Procedure in cases instituted under section 199(2).—(1) A Court of Session taking cognizance of an 
offence under sub-section (2) of section 199 shall try the case in accordance with the procedure for the trial of 
warrant-cases instituted otherwise than on a police report before a Court of Magistrate: 
Provided that the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed shall, unless the Court of 
Session, for reasons to be recorded, otherwise directs, be examined as a witness for the prosecution. 
(2) Every trial under this section shall be held in camera if either party thereto so desires or if the Court thinks 
fit so to do. 
(3) If, in any such case, the Court discharges or acquits all or any of the accused and is of opinion that there was 
no reasonable cause for making the accusation against them or any of them, it may, by its order of discharge or 
acquittal, direct the person against whom the offence was alleged to have been committed (other than the President, 
Vice-President or the Governor of a State or the Administrator of a Union territory) to show cause why he should 
not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused, when there are more than one. 
(4) The Court shall record and consider any cause which may be shown by the person so directed, and if it is 
satisfied that there was no reasonable cause for making the accusation, it may, for reasons to be recorded, make an 
order that compensation to such amount not exceeding one thousand rupees, as it may determine, be paid by such 
person to the accused or to each or any of them. 
(5) Compensation awarded under sub-section (4) shall be recovered as if it were a fine imposed by a Magistrate. 
(6) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under sub-section (4) shall, by reason of such order, 
be exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the complaint made under this section: 
Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken into account in awarding 
compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter. 
(7) The person who has been ordered under sub-section (4) to pay compensation may appeal from the order, in 
so far as it relates to the payment of compensation, to the High Court. 

116 
 
 (8) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made, the compensation shall not be 
paid to him before the period allowed for the presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, 
before the appeal has been decided. 
CHAPTER XIX 
TRIAL OF WARRANT-CASES BY MAGISTRATES 
A.—Cases instituted on a police report 
238. Compliance with section 207.—When, in any warrant-case instituted on a police report, the accused 
appears or is brought before a Magistrate at the commencement of the trial, the Magistrate shall satisfy himself that 
he has complied with the provisions of section 207. 
239. When accused shall be discharged.—If, upon considering the police report and the documents sent with 
it under section 173 and making such examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks necessary and 
after giving the prosecution and the accused an opportunity of being heard, the Magistrate considers the charge 
against the accused to be groundless, he shall discharge the accused, and record his reasons for so doing. 
240. Framing of charge.—(1) If, upon such consideration, examination, if any, and hearing, the Magistrate is 
of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence triable under this Chapter, 
which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall 
frame in writing a charge against the accused. 
(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty 
of the offence charged or claims to be tried. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In sub-section (2) of section 240 of the Principal Act, after the word “to the accused” the following 
shall be added:— 
 “present either in person or through the medium of electronic video linkage in the presence of his 
pleader in the Court.” 
 [Vide Chhattisgarh Act 13 of 2006, s. 5.] 
 
241. Conviction on plea of guilty.—If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea and may, 
in his discretion, convict him thereon. 
242. Evidence for prosecution.—(1) If the accused refuses to plead or does not plead, or claims to be tried or 
the Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 241, the Magistrate shall fix a date for the examination of 
witnesses: 
1[Provided that the Magistrate shall supply in advance to the accused, the statement of witnesses recorded 
during investigation by the police.]  
 (2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses 
directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing. 
(3) On the date so fixed, the Magistrate shall proceed to take all such evidence as may be produced in support of 
the prosecution: 
Provided that the Magistrate may permit the cross-examination of any witness to be deferred until any other 
witness or witnesses have been examined or recall any witness for further cross-examination. 
243. Evidence for defence.—(1) The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce 
his evidence; and if the accused puts in any written statement, the Magistrate shall file it with the record. 
(2) If the accused, after he has entered upon his defence, applies to the Magistrate to issue any process for 
compelling the attendance of any witness for the purpose of examination or cross-examination, or the production of 
any document or other thing, the Magistrate shall issue such process unless he considers that such application should 
be refused on the ground that it is made for the purpose of vexation or delay or for defeating the ends of justice and 
such ground shall be recorded by him in writing: 
Provided that, when the accused has cross-examined or had the opportunity of cross-examining any witness 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s.19 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

117 
 
before entering on his defence, the attendance of such witness shall not be compelled under this section, unless the 
Magistrate is satisfied that it is necessary for the ends of justice. 
(3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on an application under sub-section (2), require that the 
reasonable expenses incurred by the witness in attending for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court. 
B.—Cases instituted otherwise than on police report                      
244. Evidence for prosecution.—(1) When, in any warrant-case instituted otherwise than on a police report, 
the accused appears or is brought before a Magistrate, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take 
all such evidence as may be produced in support of the prosecution. 
(2) The Magistrate may, on the application of the prosecution, issue a summons to any of its witnesses directing 
him to attend or to produce any document or other thing. 
245. When accused shall be discharged.—(1) If, upon taking all the evidence referred to in section 244, the 
Magistrate considers, for reasons to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out which, if 
unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate shall discharge him. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a Magistrate from discharging the accused at any 
previous stage of the case if, for reasons to be recorded by such Magistrate, he considers the charge to be groundless. 
 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
West Bengal  
In section 245 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted: — 
“(3) If all the evidence referred to in section 244 are not produced in support of the prosecution 
within four years from the date of appearance of the accused, the Magistrate shall discharge the accused 
unless the prosecution satisfies the Magistrate that upon the evidence already produced and for special 
reasons there is ground for presuming that it shall not be in the interest of justice to discharge the 
accused.”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 1988, s. 5.] 
246. Procedure where accused is not discharged.—(1) If, when such evidence has been taken, or at any 
previous stage of the case, the Magistrate is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has 
committed an offence triable under this Chapter, which such Magistrate is competent to try and which, in his 
opinion, could be adequately punished by him, he shall frame in writing a charge against the accused. 
(2) The charge shall then be read and explained to the accused, and he shall be asked whether he pleads guilty 
or has any defence to make. 
(3) If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea, and may, in his discretion, convict him 
thereon. 
(4) If the accused refuses to plead, or does not plead or claims to be tried or if the accused is not convicted 
under sub-section (3), he shall be required to state, at the commencement of the next hearing of the case, or, if the 
Magistrate for reasons to be recorded in writing so thinks fit, forthwith, whether he wishes to cross-examine any, 
and, if so, which, of the witnesses for the prosecution whose evidence has been taken. 
(5) If he says he does so wish, the witnesses named by him shall be recalled and, after cross-examination and   
re-examination (if any), they shall be discharged. 

118 
 
(6) The evidence of any remaining witnesses for the prosecution shall next be taken, and after                      
cross-examination and re-examination (if any), they shall also be discharged. 
247. Evidence for defence.—The accused shall then be called upon to enter upon his defence and produce his 
evidence; and the provisions of section 243 shall apply to the case. 
C.—Conclusion of trial 
248. Acquittal or conviction.—(1) If, in any case under this Chapter in which a charge has been framed, the 
Magistrate finds the accused not guilty, he shall record an order of acquittal. 
(2) Where, in any case under this Chapter, the Magistrate finds the accused guilty, but does not proceed in 
accordance with the provisions of section 325 or section 360, he shall, after hearing the accused on the question of 
sentence, pass sentence upon him according to law. 
(3) Where, in any case under this Chapter, a previous conviction is charged under the provisions of                 
sub-section (7) of section 211 and the accused does not admit that he has been previously convicted as alleged in the 
charge, the Magistrate may, after he has convicted the said accused, take evidence in respect of the alleged previous 
conviction, and shall record a finding thereon: 
Provided that no such charge shall be read out by the Magistrate nor shall the accused be asked to plead thereto 
nor shall the previous conviction be referred to by the prosecution or in any evidence adduced by it, unless and until 
the accused has been convicted under sub-section (2). 
249. Absence of complainant.—When the proceedings have been instituted upon complaint, and on any day 
fixed for the hearing of the case, the complainant is absent, and the offence may be lawfully compounded or is not a 
cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in his discretion, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, at any 
time before the charge has been framed, discharge the accused. 
250. Compensation for accusation without reasonable cause.—(1) If, in any case instituted upon complaint 
or upon information given to a police officer or to a Magistrate, one or more persons is or are accused before a 
Magistrate of any offence triable by a Magistrate, and the Magistrate by whom the case is heard discharges or 
acquits all or any of the accused, and is of opinion that there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation 
against them or any of them, the Magistrate may, by his order of discharge or acquittal, if the person upon whose 
complaint or information the accusation was made is present, call upon him forthwith to show cause why he should 
not pay compensation to such accused or to each or any of such accused when there are more than one; or, if such 
person is not present, direct the issue of a summons to him to appear and show cause as aforesaid. 
(2) The Magistrate shall record and consider any cause which such complainant or informant may show, and if 
he is satisfied that there was no reasonable ground for making the accusation, may, for reasons to be recorded, make 
an order that compensation to such amount, not exceeding the amount of fine he is empowered to impose, as he may 
determine, be paid by such complainant or informant to the accused or to each or any of them. 
(3) The Magistrate may, by the order directing payment of the compensation under sub-section (2), further order 
that, in default of payment, the person ordered to pay such compensation shall undergo simple imprisonment for a 
period not exceeding thirty days. 
(4) When any person is imprisoned under sub-section (3), the provisions of sections 68 and 69 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall, so far as may be, apply. 
(5) No person who has been directed to pay compensation under this section shall, by reason of such order, be 
exempted from any civil or criminal liability in respect of the complaint made or information given by him: 
Provided that any amount paid to an accused person under this section shall be taken into account in awarding 
compensation to such person in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter. 
(6) A complainant or informant who has been ordered under sub-section (2) by a Magistrate of the second class 
to pay compensation exceeding one hundred rupees, may appeal from the order, as if such complainant or informant 

119 
 
had been convicted on a trial held by such Magistrate. 
(7) When an order for payment of compensation to an accused person is made in a case which is subject to 
appeal under sub-section (6), the compensation shall not be paid to him before the period allowed for the 
presentation of the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal is presented, before the appeal has been decided; and where 
such order is made in a case which is not so subject to appeal the compensation shall not be paid before the 
expiration of one month from the date of the order. 
(8) The provisions of this section apply to summons-cases as well as to warrant-cases. 
CHAPTER XX 
TRIAL OF SUMMONS-CASES BY MAGISTRATES 
251. Substance of accusation to be stated.—When in a summons-case the accused appears or is brought 
before the Magistrate, the particulars of the offence of which he is accused shall be stated to him, and he shall be 
asked whether he pleads guilty or has any defence to make, but it shall not be necessary to frame a formal charge. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In Section 251 of the Principal Act, after the word “bought before the Magistrate” the following shall be 
added :— 
“Or appears through the medium of electronic video linkage in the presence of his pleader in the Court”. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 13 of 2006, s. 6] 
252. Conviction on plea of guilty.—If the accused pleads guilty, the Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly 
as possible in the words used by the accused and may, in his discretion, convict him thereon. 
253. Conviction on plea of guilty in absence of accused in petty cases.—(1) Where a summons has been 
issued under section 206 and the accused desires to plead guilty to the charge without appearing before the 
Magistrate, he shall transmit to the Magistrate, by post or by messenger, a letter containing his plea and also the 
amount of fine specified in the summons. 
(2) The Magistrate may, in his discretion, convict the accused in his absence, on his plea of guilty and sentence 
him to pay the fine specified in the summons, and the amount transmitted by the accused shall be adjusted towards 
that fine, or where a pleader authorised by the accused in this behalf pleads guilty on behalf of the accused, the 
Magistrate shall record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the pleader and may, in his discretion, 
convict the accused on such plea and sentence him as aforesaid. 
254. Procedure when not convicted.—(1) If the Magistrate does not convict the accused under section 252 or 
section 253, the Magistrate shall proceed to hear the prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in 
support of the prosecution, and also to hear the accused and take all such evidence as he produces in his defence. 
(2) The Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, issue a summons 
to any witness directing him to attend or to produce any document or other thing. 
(3) The Magistrate may, before summoning any witness on such application, require that the reasonable 
expenses of the witness incurred in attending for the purposes of the trial be deposited in Court. 
255. Acquittal or conviction.—(1) If the Magistrate, upon taking the evidence referred to in section 254 and 
such further evidence, if any, as he may, of his own motion, cause to be produced, finds the accused not guilty, he 
shall record an order of acquittal. 

120 
 
(2) Where the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance with the provisions of section 325 or section 360, he 
shall, if he finds the accused guilty, pass sentence upon him according to law. 
(3) A Magistrate may, under section 252 or section 255, convict the accused of any offence triable under this 
Chapter, which from the facts admitted or proved he appears to have committed, whatever may be the nature of the 
complaint or summons, if the Magistrate is satisfied that the accused would not be prejudiced thereby. 
256. Non-appearance or death of complainant.—(1) If the summons has been issued on complaint, and on 
the day appointed for the appearance of the accused, or any day subsequent thereto to which the hearing may be 
adjourned, the complainant does not appear, the Magistrate shall, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, 
acquit the accused, unless for some reason he thinks it proper to adjourn the hearing of the case to some other day: 
Provided that where the complainant is represented by a pleader or by the officer conducting the prosecution or 
where the Magistrate is of opinion that the personal attendance of the complainant is not necessary, the Magistrate 
may, dispense with his attendance and proceed with the case. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall, so far as may be, apply also to cases where the non-appearance of 
the complainant is due to his death. 
257. Withdrawal of complaint.—If a complainant, at any time before a final order is passed in any case under 
this Chapter, satisfies the Magistrate that there are sufficient grounds for permitting him to withdraw his complaint 
against the accused, or if there be more than one accused, against all or any of them, the Magistrate may permit him 
to withdraw the same, and shall thereupon acquit the accused against whom the complaint is so withdrawn. 
258. Power to stop proceedings in certain cases.—In any summons-case instituted otherwise than upon 
complaint, a Magistrate of the first class or, with the previous sanction of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, any other 
Judicial Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded by him, stop the proceedings at any stage without pronouncing 
any judgment and where such stoppage of proceedings is made after the evidence of the principal witnesses has been 
recorded, pronounce a judgment of acquittal, and in any other case, release the accused, and such release shall have 
the effect of discharge. 
259. Power of Court to convert summons-cases into warrant-cases.—When in the course of the trial of a 
summons-case relating to an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding six months, it appears to 
the Magistrate that in the interests of justice, the offence should be tried in accordance with the procedure for the 
trial of warrant-cases, such Magistrate may proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided by this Code for the 
trial of warrant-cases and may re-call any witness who may have been examined. 
CHAPTER XXI 
SUMMARY TRIALS 
260. Power to try summarily.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code— 
(a) any Chief Judicial Magistrate; 
(b) any Metropolitan Magistrate; 
(c) any Magistrate of the first class specially empowered in this behalf by the High Court, 
may, if he thinks fit, try in a summary way all or any of the following offences:— 
(i) offences not punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding two 
years; 
(ii) theft, under section 379, section 380 or section 381 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where the 
value of the property stolen does not exceed 1[two thousand rupees]; 
(iii) receiving or retaining stolen property, under section 411 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 23, for “two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

121 
 
the value of the property does not exceed 1[two thousand rupees]; 
(iv) assisting in the concealment or disposal of stolen property, under section 414 of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860), where the value of such property does not exceed 1[two thousand rupees]; 
(v) offences under sections 454 and 456 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
 (vi) insult with intent to provoke a breach of the peace, under section 504, and 1[criminal intimidation 
punishable with imprisionment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both], under 
section 506 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(vii) abetment of any of the foregoing offences; 
(viii) an attempt to commit any of the foregoing offences, when such attempt is an offence; 
(ix) any offence constituted by an act in respect of which a complaint may be made under section 20 of the 
Cattle-trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871). 
(2) When, in the course of a summary trial it appears to the Magistrate that the nature of the case is such that it 
is undesirable to try it summarily, the Magistrate shall recall any witnesses who may have been examined and 
proceed to re-hear the case in the manner provided by this Code. 
261. Summary trial by Magistrate of the second class.—The High Court may confer on any Magistrate 
invested with the powers of a Magistrate of the second class power to try summarily any offence which is 
punishable only with fine or with imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months with or without fine, and any 
abetment of or attempt to commit any such offence. 
262. Procedure for summary trials.—(1) In trials under this Chapter, the procedure specified in this Code for 
the trial of summons-case shall be followed except as hereinafter mentioned. 
(2) No sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding three months shall be passed in the case of any 
conviction under this Chapter. 
263. Record in summary trials.—In every case tried summarily, the Magistrate shall enter, in such form as the 
State Government may direct, the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) the serial number of the case; 
(b) the date of the commission of the offence; 
(c) the date of the report or complaint; 
(d) the name of the complainant (if any); 
(e) the name, parentage and residence of the accused; 
(f) the offence complained of and the offence (if any) proved, and in cases coming under clause (ii), clause 
(iii) or clause (iv) of sub-section (1) of section 260, the value of the property in respect of which the offence has 
been committed; 
(g) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any); 
(h) the finding; 
(i) the sentence or other final order; 
(j) the date on which proceedings terminated. 
264. Judgment in cases tried summarily.—In every case tried summarily in which the accused does not plead 
guilty, the Magistrate shall record the substance of the evidence and a judgment containing a brief statement of the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 23, for “criminal intimidation” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

122 
 
reasons for the finding. 
265. Language of record and judgment.—(1) Every such record and judgment shall be written in the 
language of the Court. 
(2) The High Court may authorise any Magistrate empowered to try offences summarily to prepare the aforesaid 
record or judgment or both by means of an officer appointed in this behalf by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and the 
record or judgment so prepared shall be signed by such Magistrate. 
1[CHAPTER XXIA 
PLEA BARGAINING 
265A. Application of the Chapter.—(1) This Chapter shall apply in respect of an accused against whom— 
(a) the report has been forwarded by the officer in charge of the police station under section 173 alleging 
therein that an offence appears to have been committed by him other than an offence for which the punishment 
of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years has been provided 
under the law for the time being in force; or 
(b) a Magistrate has taken cognizance of an offence on complaint, other than an offence for which the 
punishment of death or of imprisonment for life or of imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years, has been 
provided under the law for the time being in force, and after examining complainant and witnesses under 
section 200, issued the process under section 204, 
but does not apply where such offence affects the socio-economic condition of the country or has been committed 
against a woman, or a child below the age of fourteen years. 
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, by notification, determine the offences 
under the law for the time being in force which shall be the offences affecting the socio-economic condition of the 
country. 
265B. Application for plea bargaining.—(1) A person accused of an offence may file an application for plea 
bargaining in the Court in which such offence is pending for trial. 
(2) The application under sub-section (1) shall contain a brief description of the case relating to which the 
application is filed including the offence to which the case relates and shall be accompanied by an affidavit sworn by 
the accused stating therein that he has voluntarily preferred, after understanding the nature and extent of punishment 
provided under the law for the offence, the plea bargaining in his case and that he has not previously been convicted 
by a Court in a case in which he had been charged with the same offence. 
(3) After receiving the application under sub-section (1), the Court shall issue notice to the Public Prosecutor or 
the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and to the accused to appear on the date fixed for the case. 
(4) When the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and the accused appear on 
the date fixed under sub-section (3), the Court shall examine the accused in camera, where the other party in the 
case shall not be present, to satisfy itself that the accused has filed the application voluntarily and where— 
(a) the Court is satisfied that the application has been filed by the accused voluntarily, it shall provide time 
to the Public Prosecutor or the complainant of the case, as the case may be, and the accused to work out a 
mutually satisfactory disposition of the case which may include giving to the victim by the accused the 
compensation and other expenses during the case and thereafter fix the date for further hearing of the case; 
(b) the Court finds that the application has been filed involuntarily by the accused or he has previously been 
convicted by a Court in a case in which he had been charged with the same offence, it shall proceed further in 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 4 (w.e.f. 5-7-2006).  

123 
 
accordance with the provisions of this Code from the stage such application has been filed under                   
sub-section (1). 
265C. Guidelines for mutually satisfactory disposition.—In working out a mutually satisfactory disposition 
under clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 265B, the Court shall follow the following procedure, namely:— 
(a) in a case instituted on a police report, the Court shall issue notice to the Public Prosecutor, the police 
officer who has investigated the case, the accused and the victim of the case to participate in the meeting to 
work out a satisfactory disposition of the case: 
Provided that throughout such process of working out a satisfactory disposition of the case, it shall be the 
duty of the Court to ensure that the entire process is completed voluntarily by the parties participating in the 
meeting: 
Provided further that the accused, if he so desires, participate in such meeting with his pleader, if any, 
engaged in the case; 
(b) in a case instituted otherwise than on police report, the Court shall issue notice to the accused and the 
victim of the case to participate in a meeting to work out a satisfactory disposition of the case: 
Provided that it shall be the duty of the Court to ensure, throughout such process of working out a 
satisfactory disposition of the case, that it is completed voluntarily by the parties participating in the meeting: 
Provided further that if the victim of the case or the accused, as the case may be, so desires, he may 
participate in such meeting with his pleader engaged in the case. 
265D. Report of the mutually satisfactory disposition to be submitted before the Court.—Where in a 
meeting under section 265C, a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out, the Court shall prepare                  
a report of such disposition which shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court and all other persons                    
who participated in the meeting and if no such disposition has been worked out, the Court shall record such 
observation and proceed further in accordance with the provisions of this Code from the stage the application under 
sub-section (1) of section 265B has been filed in such case. 
265E. Disposal of the case.—Where a satisfactory disposition of the case has been worked out under                   
section 265D, the Court shall dispose of the case in the following manner, namely:— 
(a) the Court shall award the compensation to the victim in accordance with the disposition under                  
section 265D and hear the parties on the quantum of the punishment, releasing of the accused on probation of 
good conduct or after admonition under section 360 or for dealing with the accused under the provisions of the 
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) or any other law for the time being in force and follow the 
procedure specified in the succeeding clauses for imposing the punishment on the accused; 
(b) after hearing the parties under clause (a), if the Court is of the view that section 360 or the provisions of 
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958) or any other law for the time being in force are attracted in 
the case of the accused, it may release the accused on probation or provide the benefit of any such law, as the 
case may be; 
(c) after hearing the parties under clause (b), if the Court finds that minimum punishment has been 
provided under the law for the offence committed by the accused, it may sentence the accused to half of such 
minimum punishment; 
(d) in case after hearing the parties under clause (b), the Court finds that the offence committed by the 
accused is not covered under clause (b) or clause (c), then, it may sentence the accused to one-fourth of the 
punishment provided or extendable, as the case may be, for such offence. 
265F. Judgment of the Court.—The Court shall deliver its judgment in terms of section 265E in the open 
Court and the same shall be signed by the presiding officer of the Court. 

124 
 
265G. Finality of the judgment.—The judgment delivered by the Court under section 265G shall be final and 
no appeal (except the special leave petition under article 136 and writ petition under articles 226 and 227 of the 
Constitution) shall lie in any Court against such judgment. 
265H. Power of the Court in plea bargaining.—A Court shall have, for the purposes of discharging its 
functions under this Chapter, all the powers vested in respect of bail, trial of offences and other matters relating to 
the disposal of a case in such Court under this Code. 
265-I. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment.—
The provisions of section 428 shall apply, for setting off the period of detention undergone by the accused against 
the sentence of imprisonment imposed under this Chapter, in the same manner as they apply in respect of the 
imprisonment under other provisions of this Code. 
265J. Savings.—The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
therewith contained in any other provisions of this Code and nothing in such other provisions shall be construed to 
constrain the meaning of any provision of this Chapter. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression “Public Prosecutor” has the meaning assigned to 
it under clause (u) of section 2 and includes an Assistant Public Prosecutor appointed under section 25. 
265K. Statements of accused not to be used.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time 
being in force, the statements or facts stated by an accused in an application for plea bargaining filed under                
section 265B shall not be used for any other purpose except for the purpose of this Chapter. 
265L. Non-application of the Chapter.—Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any juvenile or child as 
defined in clause (k) of section 2 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000).] 
CHAPTER XXII 
ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS CONFINED OR DETAINED IN PRISONS 
266. Definitions.—In this Chapter,— 
(a) “detained” includes detained under any law providing for preventive detention; 
(b) “prison” includes,— 
(i) any place which has been declared by the State Government, by general or special order, to be a 
subsidiary jail; 
(ii) any reformatory, Borstal institution or institution of a like nature. 
267. Power to require attendance of prisoners.—(1) Whenever, in the course of an inquiry, trial or 
proceeding under this Code, it appears to a Criminal Court,— 
(a) that a person confined or detained in a prison should be brought before the Court for answering to a 
charge of an offence, or for the purpose of any proceedings against him, or 
(b) that it is necessary for the ends of justice to examine such person as a witness, 
the Court may make an order requiring the officer in charge of the prison to produce such person before the Court 
answering to the charge or for the purpose of such proceeding or, as the case may be, for giving evidence. 
(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made by a Magistrate of the second class, it shall not be forwarded 
to, or acted upon by, the officer in charge of the prison unless it is countersigned by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, to 
whom such Magistrate is subordinate. 
(3) Every order submitted for countersigning under sub-section (2) shall be accompanied by a statement of the 
facts which, in the opinion of the Magistrate, render the order necessary, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom 

125 
 
it is submitted may, after considering such statement, decline to countersign the order. 
268. Power of State Government to exclude certain persons from operation of section 267.—(1) The State 
Government may, at any time, having regard to the matters specified in sub-section (2), by general or special order, 
direct that any person or class of persons shall not be removed from the prison in which he or they may be confined 
or detained, and thereupon, so long as the order remains in force, no order made under section 267, whether before 
or after the order of the State Government, shall have effect in respect of such person or class of persons. 
(2) Before making an order under sub-section (1), the State Government shall have regard to the following 
matters, namely:— 
(a) the nature of the offence for which, or the grounds on which, the person or class of persons has been 
ordered to be confined or detained in prison; 
(b) the likelihood of the disturbance of public order if the person or class of persons is allowed to be 
removed from the prison; 
(c) the public interest, generally. 
269. Officer in charge of prison to abstain from carrying out order in certain contingencies.—Where the 
person in respect of whom an order is made under section 267— 
(a) is by reason of sickness or infirmity unfit to be removed from the prison; or 
(b) is under committal for trial or under remand pending trial or pending a preliminary investigation; or 
(c) is in custody for a period which would expire before the expiration of the time required for complying 
with the order and for taking him back to the prison in which he is confined or detained; or 
(d) is a person to whom an order made by the State Government under section 268 applies, 
the officer in charge of the prison shall abstain from carrying out the Court's order and shall send to the Court a 
statement of reasons for so abstaining: 
Provided that where the attendance of such person is required for giving evidence at a place not more than 
twenty-five kilometres distance from the prison, the officer in charge of the prison shall not so abstain for the reason 
mentioned in clause (b). 
270. Prisoner to be brought to Court in custody.—Subject to the provisions of section 269, the officer in 
charge of the prison shall, upon delivery of an order made under sub-section (1) of section 267 and duly 
countersigned, where necessary, under sub-section (2) thereof, cause the person named in  the order to be taken to 
the Court in which his attendance is required, so as to be present there at the time mentioned in the order, and shall 
cause him to be kept in custody in or near the Court until he has been examined or until the Court authorises him to 
be taken back to the prison in which he was confined or detained. 
271. Power to issue commission for examination of witness in prison.—The provisions of this Chapter shall 
be without prejudice to the power of the Court to issue, under section 284, a commission for the examination, as a 
witness, of any person confined or detained in a prison; and the provisions of Part B of Chapter XXIII shall apply in 
relation to the examination on commission of any such person in the prison as they apply in relation to the 
examination on commission of any other person. 
CHAPTER XXIII 
EVIDENCE IN INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 
A.—Mode of taking and recording evidence 
272. Language of Courts.—The State Government may determine what shall be, for purposes of this Code, the 
language of each Court within the State other than the High Court. 

126 
 
273. Evidence to be taken in presence of accused.—Except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence 
taken in the course of the trial or other proceeding shall be taken in the presence of the accused, or, when his 
personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader: 
1[Provided that where the evidence of a woman below the age of eighteen years who is alleged to have been 
subjected to rape or any other sexual offence, is to be recorded, the court may take appropriate measures to ensure 
that such woman is not confronted by the accused while at the same time ensuring the right of cross-examination of 
the accused.] 
Explanation.—In this section, “accused” includes a person in relation to whom any proceeding under                 
Chapter VIII has been commenced under this Code. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Gujarat 
In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as “the principal Act”), in section 273, after the 
words “in the presence of his pleader”, the words “or, as the case may be, through the medium of Electronic Video 
Linkage when the court on its own motion or on an application so directs in the interests of justice” shall be added. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 31 of 2017, sec. 2.] 
274. Record in summons-cases and inquiries.—(1) In all summons-cases tried before a Magistrate, in all 
inquiries under sections 145 to 148 (both inclusive), and in all proceedings under section 446 otherwise than in the 
course of a trial, the Magistrate shall, as the examination of each witness proceeds, make a memorandum of the 
substance of the evidence in the language of the Court: 
Provided that if the Magistrate is unable to make such memorandum himself, he shall, after recording the reason 
of his inability, cause such memorandum to be made in writing or from his dictation in open Court. 
(2) Such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the record. 
275. Record in warrant-cases.—(1) In all warrant-cases tried before a Magistrate, the evidence of each witness 
shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the Magistrate himself or by his dictation in 
open Court or, where he is unable to do so owing to a physical or other incapacity, under his direction and 
superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed by him in this behalf: 
2[Provided that evidence of a witness under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic 
means in the presence of the advocate of the person accused of the offence.]  
(2) Where the Magistrate causes the evidence to be taken down, he shall record a certificate that the evidence 
could not be taken down by himself for the reasons referred to in sub-section (1). 
(3) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative; but the Magistrate may, in his 
discretion take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer. 
(4) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the record. 
276. Record in trial before Court of Session.—(1) In all trials before a Court of Session, the evidence of each 
witness shall, as his examination proceeds, be taken down in writing either by the presiding Judge himself or by his 
dictation in open Court, or under his direction and superintendence, by an officer of the Court appointed by him in 
this behalf. 
3[(2) Such evidence shall ordinarily be taken down in the form of a narrative, but the presiding Judge may, in 
his discretion, take down, or cause to be taken down, any part of such evidence in the form of question and answer.] 
(3) The evidence so taken down shall be signed by the presiding Judge and shall form part of the record. 
                                                 
1. Proviso ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 20 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 20 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009) 
3. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 20, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

127 
 
277. Language of record of evidence.—In every case where evidence is taken down under section 275 or 
276,— 
(a) if the witness gives evidence in the language of the Court, it shall be taken down in that language; 
(b)  if  he gives evidence in any other language, it may,  if  practicable, be taken down in that language, and 
if  it is not practicable to do so, a true translation of  the evidence in the language of the Court  shall be  
prepared as  the examination of  the witness  proceeds, signed   by the Magistrate or  presiding Judge, and  shall  
form part of   the record; 
(c) where under clause (b) evidence is taken down in a language other than the language of the Court, a true 
translation thereof in the language of the Court  shall be prepared as soon as practicable, signed by the 
Magistrate or presiding Judge, and shall form part of the record: 
Provided that when under clause (b) evidence is taken down in English and a translation thereof in the language 
of the Court is not required by any of the parties, the Court may dispense with such translation. 
278. Procedure in regard to such evidence when completed.—(1) As the evidence of each witness taken 
under section 275 or section 276 is completed, it shall be read over to him in the presence of the accused, if in 
attendance, or of his pleader, if he appears by pleader, and shall, if necessary, be corrected. 
(2) If the witness denies the correctness of any part of the evidence when the same is read over to him, the 
Magistrate or presiding Judge may, instead of correcting the evidence, make a memorandum thereon of the 
objection made to it by the witness and shall add such remarks as he thinks necessary. 
(3) If the record of the evidence is in a language different from that in which it has been given and the witness 
does not understand that language, the record shall be interpreted to him in the language in which it was given, or in 
a language which he understands. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Gujarat 
In the principal Act, in section 278, after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be added, namely: — 
“(4) Nothing contained in sub-sections (1) to (3) shall apply when the evidence under section 273 is taken 
through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage. 
(5) The evidence taken through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage in electronic from shall be the 
electronic record within the meaning of clause (t) of section 2 if the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 
2000)” 
[Vide Gujarat Act 31 of 2017, sec. 3.] 
279. Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader.—(1) Whenever any evidence is given in a language 
not understood by the accused, and he is present in Court in person, it shall be interpreted to him in open Court in a 
language understood by him. 
(2) If he appears by pleader and the evidence is given in a language other than the language of the Court, and 
not understood by the pleader, it shall be interpreted to such pleader in that language. 
 (3) When documents are put for the purpose of formal proof, it shall be in the discretion of the Court to 
interpret as much thereof as appears necessary. 
280. Remarks respecting demeanour of witness.—When a presiding Judge or Magistrate has recorded the 
evidence of a witness, he shall also record such remarks (if any) as he thinks material respecting the demeanour of 
such witness whilst under examination. 
281. Record of examination of accused.—(1) Whenever the accused is examined by a Metropolitan 
Magistrate, the Magistrate shall make a memorandum of the substance of the examination of the accused in the 
language of the Court and such memorandum shall be signed by the Magistrate and shall form part of the 

128 
 
record. 
(2) Whenever the accused is examined by any Magistrate other than a Metropolitan Magistrate, or by a 
Court of Session, the whole of such examination, including  every question  put  to  him and every answer  
given by  him, shall be recorded  in full by the   presiding Judge or Magistrate   himself or  where  he is unable 
to do so owing to a physical or other  incapacity, under   his  direction and superintendence by an officer of the 
Court appointed by him in this behalf. 
(3) The record shall, if practicable, be in the language in which the accused is examined or, if that is not 
practicable, in the language of the Court. 
(4) The record shall be shown or read to the accused, or, if he does not understand the language in which it 
is written, shall be interpreted to him in a language which he understands, and he shall be at liberty to explain 
or add to his answers. 
 (5) It shall thereafter be signed by the accused and by the Magistrate or presiding Judge, who shall certify 
under his own hand that the examination was taken in his presence and hearing and that the record contains a 
full and true account of the statement made by the accused. 
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to the examination of an accused person in the course 
of a summary trial. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Gujarat 
In the principal Act, in section 281, in sub-section (6), after the words “the examination of an accused 
person”, the words “either through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage or” shall be inserted. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 31 of 2017, sec. 4.] 
282. Interpreter to be bound to interpret truthfully.—When the services of an interpreter are required 
by any Criminal Court for the interpretation of any evidence or statement, he shall be bound to state the true 
interpretation of such evidence or statement. 
283. Record in High Court.—Every High Court may, by general rule, prescribe the manner in which the 
evidence of witnesses and the examination of the accused shall be taken down in cases coming before it, and 
such evidence and examination shall be taken down in accordance with such rule. 
B.—Commissions for the examination of witnesses 
284. When attendance of witness may be dispensed with and commission issued.—(1) Whenever, in 
the course of any  inquiry, trial or other  proceeding under this Code, it appears to a Court or Magistrate that 
the examination of a witness  is  necessary  for the ends of  justice, and  that the attendance of  such  witness  
cannot  be  procured  without an amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of 
the case, would be unreasonable, the Court or Magistrate may dispense with such attendance and may issue a 
commission for the examination of the witness in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter: 
Provided that where the examination of the President or the Vice-President of India or the Governor of a 
State or the Administrator of a Union territory as a witness is necessary for the ends of Justice, a commission 
shall be issued for the examination of such a witness. 
(2) The Court may, when issuing a commission for  the examination of a witness for the prosecution, 
direct that such amount as the Court considers reasonable to meet the expenses of the accused, including the 
pleader's fees, be paid by the prosecution. 

129 
 
285. Commission to whom to be issued.—(1) If the witness is within the territories to which this Code 
extends, the commission shall be directed to the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, as the case may be, within whose local jurisdiction the witness is to be found. 
(2) If the witness is in India, but in a State or an area to which this Code does not extend, the commission shall 
be directed to such Court or officer as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 
(3) If the witness is in a country or place outside India and arrangements have been made by the Central 
Government with the Government of such country or place for taking the evidence of witnesses in relation to 
criminal matters, the commission shall be issued in such form, directed to such Court or officer, and sent to such 
authority for transmission as the Central Government may, by notification, prescribed in this behalf. 
286. Execution of commissions.—Upon receipt of the commission, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, or 
Chief Judicial Magistrate or such Metropolitan or Judicial Magistrate as he may appoint in this behalf, shall summon 
the witness before him or proceed to the place where the witness is, and shall take down his evidence in the same 
manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in trials or warrant-cases under this Code. 
287. Parties may examine witnesses.—(1) The parties to any proceeding under this Code in which a 
commission is issued may respectively forward any interrogatories in writing which the Court or Magistrate 
directing the commission may think relevant to the issue, and it shall be lawful for the Magistrate, Court or officer to 
whom the commission, is directed, or to whom the duty of executing it is delegated, to examine the witness upon 
such interrogatories. 
(2) Any such party may appear before such magistrate, Court or Officer by pleader, or if not in custody, in 
person, and may examine, cross-examine and re-examine (as the case may be) the said witness. 
288. Return of commission.—(1) After any commission issued under section 284 has been duly executed, it 
shall be returned, together with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the Court or Magistrate issuing 
the commission; and the commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open at all reasonable times to 
inspection of the parties, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either party, and 
shall form part of the record. 
(2) Any deposition so taken, if it satisfies the conditions prescribed by section 33 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872), may also be received in evidence at any subsequent stage of the case before another Court. 
289. Adjournment of proceeding.—In every case in which a commission is issued under section 284, the 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding may be adjourned for a specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and 
return of the commission. 
290. Execution of foreign commissions.—(1) The provisions of section 286 and so much of section 287 and 
section 288 as relate to the execution of a commission and its return shall apply in respect of commissions issued by 
any of the Courts, Judges or Magistrates hereinafter mentioned as they apply to commissions issued under section 
284. 
(2) The Courts, Judges and Magistrates referred to in sub-section (1) are— 
(a) any such Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction within an area in India to which this Code 
does not extend, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; 
(b) any Court, Judge or Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in any such country or place outside India, as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, and having authority, under the law in force in 
that country or place, to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses in relation to criminal matters. 
291. Deposition of medical witness.—(1) The deposition of civil surgeon or other medical witness, taken and 
attested by a Magistrate in the presence of the accused, or taken on commission under this Chapter, may be given in 

130 
 
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, although the deponent is not called as a witness. 
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and 
examine any such deponent as to the subject-matter of his deposition. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Gujarat 
In the principal Act, in section 291, in sub-section (1), after the words “in the presence of accused”, the words 
“or, as the case may be through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage” shall be inserted. 
  [Vide Gujarat Act 31 of 2017, sec. 5.] 
1[291A. Identification report of Magistrate.—(1) Any document purporting to be a report of identification 
under the hand of an Executive Magistrate in respect of a person or property may be used as evidence in any inquiry, 
trial or other proceeding under this Code, although such Magistrate is not called as a witness: 
Provided that where such report contains a statement of any suspect or witness to which the provisions of 
section 21, section 32, section 33, section 155 or section 157, as the case may be, of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
(1 of 1872), apply, such statement shall not be used under this sub-section except in accordance with the provisions 
of those sections. 
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or of the accused, summon 
and examine such Magistrate as to the subject-matter of the said report.] 
292. Evidence of officers of the Mint.—(1) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of any 
such 2[officer of any Mint or of any Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press (including the officer of 
the Controller of Stamps and Stationery) or of any Forensic Department or Division of Forensic Science Laboratory 
or any Government Examiner of Questioned Documents or any State Examiner of Questioned Documents, as the 
case may be,] as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf, upon any matter or thing duly 
submitted to him for examination and report in the course of any proceeding under this Code, may be used as 
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, although such officer is not called as a witness. 
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such officer as to the subject-matter of his report: 
Provided that no such officer shall be summoned to produce any records on which the report is based. 
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), no 
such officer shall,  2[except with the permission of the General Manager or any officer in charge of any Mint or of any 
Note Printing Press or of any Security Printing Press or of any Forensic Department or any officer in charge of the 
Forensic Science Laboratory or of the Government Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation or of the State 
Examiner of Questioned Documents Organisation, as the case may be,] be permitted— 
(a) to give any evidence derived from any unpublished official records on which the report is based; or 
(b) to disclose the nature or particulars of any test applied by him in the course of the examination of the 
matter or thing. 
293. Reports of certain Government scientific experts.—(1) Any document purporting to be a report under 
the hand of a Government scientific expert to whom this section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to 
him for examination or analysis and report in the course of any proceeding under this Code, may be used as 
evidence in any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 24 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 16-4-2006). 

131 
 
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such expert as to the subject-matter of his report. 
(3) Where any such expert is summoned by a Court, and he is unable to attend personally, he may, unless the 
Court has expressly directed him to appear personally, depute any responsible officer working with him to attend the 
Court, if such officer is conversant with the facts of the case and can satisfactorily depose in Court on his behalf. 
(4) This section applies to the following Government scientific experts, namely:— 
(a) any Chemical Examiner or Assistant Chemical Examiner to Government; 
1[(b) the Chief Controller of Explosives;] 
(c) the Director of the Finger Print Bureau; 
(d) the Director,  Haffkeine Institute, Bombay; 
(e) the Director 2[, Deputy Director or Assistant Director] of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory or a 
State Forensic Science Laboratory; 
(f) the Serologist to the Government; 
3[(g) any other Government scientific expert specified, by notification, by the Central Government for this 
purpose.] 
294. No formal proof of certain documents.—(1) Where any document is filed before any Court by the 
prosecution or the accused, the particulars of every such document shall be included in a list and the prosecution or 
the accused, as the case may be, or the pleader for the prosecution or the accused, if any, shall be called upon to 
admit or deny the genuineness of each such document. 
(2) The list of documents shall be in such form as be prescribed by the State Government. 
(3) Where the genuineness of any document is not disputed, such document may be read in evidence in inquiry, 
trial or other proceeding under this Code without proof of the signature of the person to whom it purports to be 
signed: 
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require such signature to be proved. 
295. Affidavit in proof of conduct of public servants.—When any application is made to any Court in the 
course of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, and allegations are made therein respecting any 
public servant, the applicant may give evidence of the facts alleged in the application by affidavit, and the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, order that evidence relating to such facts be so given. 
296. Evidence of formal character on affidavit.—(1) The evidence of any person whose evidence is of a 
formal character may be given by affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code. 
(2) The Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application of the prosecution or the accused, summon and 
examine any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit. 
297. Authorities before whom affidavits may be sworn.—(1) Affidavits to be used before any Court under 
this Code may be sworn or affirmed before— 
4[(a) any Judge or Judicial or Executive Magistrate, or] 
(b) any Commissioner of Oaths appointed by a High Court or Court of Session, or 
(c) any notary appointed under the Notaries Act, 1952 (53 of 1952). 
(2) Affidavits shall be confined to, and shall state separately, such facts as the deponent is able to prove from his 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 26, for cl. (b) (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 21 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
3. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 26 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
4. Subs.  by Act 45 of 1978, s. 22,  for cl. (a)  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

132 
 
own knowledge and such facts as he has reasonable ground to believe to be true, and in the latter case, the deponent 
shall clearly state the grounds of such belief. 
(3) The Court may order any scandalous and irrelevant matter in the affidavit to be struck out or amended. 
298. Previous conviction or acquittal how proved.—In any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, 
a previous conviction or acquittal may be proved, in addition to any other mode provided by any law for the time 
being  in force,— 
(a) by an extract certified under the hand of the officer having the custody of the records of the Court in 
which such conviction or acquittal was held, to be a copy of the sentence or order,  or 
(b) in case of a conviction, either by a certificate signed by the officer in charge of the Jail in which the 
punishment or any part thereof was undergone, or by production of the warrant of commitment under which the 
punishment was suffered,  
together with, in each of such cases, evidence as to the identity of the accused person with the person so convicted or 
acquitted. 
299. Record of evidence in absence of accused.—(1) If it is proved that an accused person has absconded, and 
that there is no immediate prospect of arresting him, the Court competent to try 1[, or commit for trial,] such person 
for the offence complained of may, in his absence, examine the witnesses (if any) produced on behalf of the 
prosecution, and record their depositions and any such deposition may, on the arrest of such person, be given in 
evidence against him on the inquiry into, or trial for, the offence with which he is charged, if the deponent is dead or 
incapable of giving evidence or cannot be found or his presence cannot be procured without an amount of delay, 
expense or inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable. 
(2) If it appears that an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life has been committed by some 
person or persons unknown, the High Court or the Sessions Judge may direct that any Magistrate of the first class 
shall hold an inquiry and examine any witnesses who can give evidence concerning the offence and any depositions 
so taken may be given in evidence against any person who is subsequently accused of the offence, if the deponent is 
dead or incapable of giving evidence or beyond the limits of India. 
CHAPTER XXIV  
GENERAL PROVISIONS AS TO INQUIRIES AND TRIALS 
300. Person once convicted or acquitted not to be tried for same offence.—(1) A person who has once been 
tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an offence and convicted or acquitted of such offence shall, while such 
conviction or acquittal remains in force, not be liable to be tried again for the same offence, nor on the same facts for 
any other offence for which a different charge from the one made against him might have been made under                  
sub-section (1) of section 221, or for which he might have been convicted under sub-section (2) thereof. 
(2) A person acquitted or convicted of any offence may be afterwards tried, with the consent of the State 
Government, for any distinct offence for which a separate charge might have been made against him at the former 
trial under sub-section (1) of section 220. 
(3) A person convicted of any offence constituted by any act causing consequences which, together with such 
act, constituted a different offence from that of which he was convicted, may be afterwards tried for such last 
mentioned offence, if the consequences had not happened, or were not known to the Court to have happened, at the 
time when he was convicted. 
(4) A person acquitted convicted of any offence constituted by any acts may, notwithstanding such acquittal or 
conviction, be subsequently charged with, and tried for, any other offence constituted by the same acts which he 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 23 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

133 
 
may have committed if the Court by which he was first tried was not competent to try the offence with which he is 
subsequently charged. 
(5) A person discharged under section 258 shall not be tried again for the same offence except with the consent 
of the Court by which he was discharged or of any other Court to which the first-mentioned Court is subordinate. 
(6) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of section 26 of the General Clauses                      
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) or of section 188 of this Code. 
Explanation.—The dismissal of a complaint, or the discharge of the accused, is not an acquittal for the purposes 
of this section. 
Illustrations  
(a) A is tried upon a charge of theft as a servant and aquitted.  He cannot afterwards, while the acquittal remains in 
force, be charged with theft as a servant, or, upon the same facts, with theft simply, or with criminal breach of trust. 
(b) A is tried for causing grievous hurt and convicted.  The person injured afterwards dies.  A may be tried again for 
culpable homicide. 
(c) A is charged before the Court of Session and convicted of the culpable homicide of B.  A may not afterwards be 
tried on the same facts for the murder of B. 
(d) A is charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of, voluntarily causing hurt to B.  A may 
not afterwards be tried for voluntarily causing grievous hurt to B on the same facts, unless the case comes within                       
sub-section (3) of this section. 
(e) A is charged by a Magistrate of the second class with, and convicted by him of, theft of property from the person of 
B. A  may subsequently be charged with, and tried for, robbery on the same facts.   
(f) A, B and C are charged by a Magistrate of the first class with, and convicted by him of, robbing D.  A, B and C may 
afterwards be charged with, and tried for, dacoity on the same facts. 
301. Appearance by Public Prosecutors.—(1) The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge 
of a case may appear and plead without any written authority before any Court in which that case is under inquiry, 
trial or appeal. 
(2) If in any such case any private person instructs a pleader to prosecute any person in any Court, the Public 
Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of the case shall conduct the prosecution, and the pleader so 
instructed shall act therein under the directions of the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, and may, 
with the permission of the Court, submit written arguments after the evidence is closed in the case. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
West Bengal 
For sub-section (1) of section 301 of the principal Act, the following sub-sections shall be 
substituted:— 
“(1) (a) The Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may appear and plead without any written authority before 
any Court in which that case is under inquiry, trial or appeal. 
(b) The Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may appear and plead without any written authority 
before any Court in which that case is under inquiry or trial.”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 26 of 1990, s. 4.] 
302. Permission to conduct prosecution.—(1) Any Magistrate inquiring into or trying a case may permit the 
prosecution to be conducted by any person other than a police officer below the rank of inspector; but no person, 
other than the Advocate-General or Government Advocate or a Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor, 

134 
 
shall be entitled to do so without such permission: 
Provided that no police officer shall be permitted to conduct the prosecution if he has taken part in the 
investigation into the offence with respect to which the accused is being prosecuted. 
(2) Any person conducting the prosecution may do so personally or by a pleader. 
303. Right of person against whom proceedings are instituted to be defended.—Any person accused of an 
offence before a Criminal Court, or against whom proceedings are instituted under this Code, may of right be 
defended by a pleader of his choice. 
304. Legal aid to accused at State expense in certain cases.—(1) Where, in a trial before the Court of Session, 
the accused is not represented by a pleader, and where it appears to the Court that the accused has not sufficient 
means to engage a pleader, the Court shall assign a pleader for his defence at the expense of the State. 
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Government, make rules providing for— 
(a) the mode of selecting pleaders for defence under sub-section (1); 
(b) the facilities to be allowed to such pleaders by the Courts; 
(c) the fees payable to such pleaders by the Government, and generally, for carrying out the purposes of 
sub-section (1). 
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that, as from such date as may be specified in the 
notification, the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to any class of trials before other Courts 
in the State as they apply in relation to trials before Courts of  Session. 
305. Procedure when corporation or registered society is an accused.—(1) In this section, “corporation” 
means an incorporated company or other body corporate, and includes a society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). 
(2) Where a corporation is the accused person or one of the accused persons in an inquiry or trial, it may appoint 
a representative for the purpose of the inquiry or trial and such appointment need not be under the seal of the 
corporation.  
(3) Where a representative of a corporation appears, any requirement of this Code that anything shall be done in 
the presence of the accused or shall be read or stated or explained to the accused, shall be construed as a requirement 
that thing shall be done in the presence of the representative or read or stated or explained to the representative, and 
any requirement that the accused shall be examined shall be construed as a requirement that the representative shall 
be examined. 
(4) Where a representative of a corporation does not appear, any such requirement as is referred to in                     
sub-section (3) shall not apply. 
(5) Where a statement in writing purporting to be signed by the managing director of the corporation or by any 
person (by whatever name called) having, or being one of the persons having the management of the affairs of the 
corporation to the effect that the person named in the statement has been appointed as the representative of the 
corporation for the purposes of this section, is filed, the Court shall, unless the contrary is proved, presume that such 
person has been so appointed. 
(6) If a question arises as to whether any person, appearing as the representative of a corporation in an inquiry 
or trial before a Court is or is not such representative, the question shall be determined by the Court. 
306. Tender of pardon to accomplice.—(1) With a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to 
have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to an offence to which this section applies, the Chief Judicial 

135 
 
Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate at any stage of the investigation or inquiry into, or the trial of, the offence, 
and the Magistrate of the first class inquiring into or trying the offence, at any stage of the inquiry or trial, may 
tender a pardon to such person on condition of his making a full and true disclosure of the whole of the 
circumstances within his knowledge relative to the offence and to every other person concerned, whether as 
principal or abettor, in the commission thereof. 
(2) This section applies to— 
(a) any offence triable exclusively by the Court of Session or by the Court of a Special Judge appointed 
under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952); 
(b) any offence punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years or with a more severe 
sentence.  
(3) Every Magistrate who tenders a pardon under sub-section (1) shall record— 
(a) his reasons for so doing; 
(b) whether the tender was or was not accepted by the person to whom it was made, 
and shall, on application made by the accused, furnish him with a copy of such record free of cost. 
(4) Every person accepting a tender of pardon made under sub-section (1)— 
(a) shall be examined as a witness in the Court of the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence and in 
the subsequent trial, if any; 
(b) shall, unless he is already on bail, be detained in custody until the termination of the trial. 
(5) Where a person has accepted a tender of pardon made under sub-section (1) and has been examined under 
sub-section (4), the Magistrate taking cognizance of the offence shall, without making any further inquiry in the 
case— 
(a) commit it for trial— 
(i) to the Court of Session if the offence is triable exclusively by that Court or if the Magistrate taking 
cognizance is the Chief Judicial Magistrate; 
(ii) to a Court of Special Judge appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952), 
if the offence is triable exclusively by that Court; 
(b) in any other case, make over the case to the Chief Judicial Magistrate who shall try the case himself. 
307. Power to direct tender of pardon.—At any time after commitment of a case but before judgment is 
passed, the Court to which the commitment is made may, with a view to obtaining at the trial the evidence of any 
person supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, any such offence, tender a pardon on 
the same condition to such person. 
308. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon.—(1) Where, in regard to a person who has 
accepted a tender of pardon made under section 306 or section 307, the Public Prosecutor certifies that in his opinion 
such person has, either by wilfully concealing anything essential or by giving false evidence, not complied with the 
condition on which the tender was made, such person may be tried for the offence in respect of which the pardon 
was so tendered or for any other offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection with the same 
matter, and also for the offence of giving false evidence: 

136 
 
Provided that such person shall not be tried jointly with any of the other accused: 
Provided further that such person shall not be tried for the offence of giving false evidence except with the 
sanction of the High Court, and nothing contained in section 195 or section 340 shall apply to that offence. 
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of pardon and recorded by a Magistrate under 
section 164 or by a Court under sub-section (4) of section 306 may be given in evidence against him at such trial. 
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he has complied with the condition upon which such 
tender was made; in which case it shall be for the prosecution to prove that the condition has not been complied 
with. 
(4) At such trial, the Court shall— 
(a) if it is a Court of Session, before the charge is read out and explained to the accused; 
(b) if it is the Court of a Magistrate, before the evidence of the witnesses for the prosecution is taken, 
ask the accused whether he pleads that he has complied with the conditions on which the tender of pardon was 
made.                    
(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the trial and it shall, before 
passing judgment in the case, find whether or not  the  accused  has  complied  with  the conditions of the           
pardon, and,  if it finds that he has so complied, it shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, pass 
judgment of acquittal. 
309. Power to postpone or adjourn proceedings.—1[(1) In every inquiry or trial the proceedings shall be 
continued from day-to-day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless the Court finds the 
adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded: 
Provided that when the inquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 376, 2[section 376A, section 376AB, , 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA or section DB  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the inquiry or 
trial shall] be completed within a period of two months from the date of filing of the charge sheet.] 
 (2) If the Court, after taking cognizance of an offence, or commencement of trial, finds it necessary or 
advisable to postpone the commencement of, or adjourn, any inquiry or trial, it may, from time to time, for reasons 
to be recorded, postpone or adjourn the same on such terms as it thinks fit, for such time as it considers reasonable,  
and may by a warrant remand the accused if in custody: 
Provided that no Magistrate shall remand an accused person to custody under this section for a term exceeding 
fifteen days at a time: 
Provided further that when witnesses are in attendance, no adjournment or postponement shall be granted, 
without examining them, except for special reasons to be recorded in writing: 
3[Provided also that no adjournment shall be granted for the purpose only of enabling the accused person to 
show cause against the sentence proposed to be imposed on him.] 
4[Provided also that— 
(a) no adjournment shall be granted at the request of a party, except where the circumstances are beyond 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 21, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 16, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).  
3. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 24 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
4. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1-11-2010).  

137 
 
the control of that party; 
(b) the fact that the pleader of a party is engaged in another Court, shall not be a ground for adjournment; 
(c) where a witness is present in Court but a party or his pleader is not present or the party or his pleader 
though present in Court, is not ready to examine or cross-examine the witness, the Court may, if thinks fit, 
record the statement of the witness and pass such orders as it thinks fit dispensing with the examination-in-chief 
or cross-examination of the witness, as the case may be.] 
Explanation 1.—If sufficient evidence has been obtained to raise a suspicion that the accused may have 
committed an offence, and it appears likely that further evidence may be obtained by a remand, this is a reasonable 
cause for a remand. 
Explanation 2.—The terms on which an adjournment or postponement may be granted include, in appropriate 
cases, the payment of costs by the prosecution or the accused. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 309 of the Code, for the words, figures and letters “section 376, section 
376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D”, the words, figures and letters “section 354, section 354A, 
section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 354E, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, 
section 376D, section 376E, section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 11.] 
Maharashtra  
In section 309 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in its application to the State of Maharashtra 
(hereinafter, in this Chapter, referred to as “the Code of Criminal Procedure”), after the existing proviso, the 
following proviso shall be added, namely:— 
“Provided further that, when the enquiry or trial relates to an offence under section 332 or 353 (45 of 1860) of 
the Indian Penal Code, the inquiry or trial shall, as far as possible be completed within a period of six months from 
the date of filing of the charge sheet”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act, 40 of 2018, s. 4.] 
310. Local inspection.—(1) Any Judge or Magistrate may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding, 
after due notice to the parties, visit and inspect any place in which an offence is alleged to have been committed, or 
any other place in which it is in his opinion necessary to view for the purpose of properly appreciating the evidence 
given at such inquiry or trial, and shall without unnecessary delay record a memorandum of any relevant facts 
observed at such inspection. 
(2) Such memorandum shall form part of the record of the case and if the prosecutor, complainant or accused or 
any other party to the case, so desires, a copy of the memorandum shall be furnished to him free of cost. 
311. Power to summon material witness, or examine person present.—Any Court may, at any stage of any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code, summon any person as a witness, or examine any person in 
attendance, though not summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine any person already examined; and the 
Court shall summon and examine or recall and re-examine any such person if his evidence appears to it to be 
essential to the just decision of the case. 

138 
 
1[311A. Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen signatures or handwriting.—If a Magistrate 
of the first class is satisfied that, for the purposes of any investigation or proceeding under this Code, it is expedient 
to direct any person, including an accused person, to give specimen signatures or handwriting, he may make an 
order to that effect and in that case the person to whom the order relates shall be produced or shall attend at the time 
and place specified in such order and shall give his specimen signatures or handwriting: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the person has at some time been arrested in 
connection with such investigation or proceeding.] 
312. Expenses of complainants and witnesses.—Subject to any rules made by the State Government, any 
Criminal Court may, if it thinks fit, order payment, on the part of the Government, of the reasonable expenses of any 
complainant or witness attending for the purposes of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding before such Court under 
this Code. 
313. Power to examine the accused.—(1) In every inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling the accused 
personally to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the Court— 
(a) may at any stage, without previously warning the accused put such questions to him as the Court 
considers necessary; 
(b) shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before he is called on for his 
defence, question him generally on the case: 
Provided that in a summons-case, where the Court has dispensed with the personal attendance of the accused, it 
may also dispense with his examination under clause (b).  
(2) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is examined under sub-section (1). 
(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment by refusing to answer such questions, or by giving 
false answers to them. 
 (4) The answers given by the accused may be taken into consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put in 
evidence for or against him in any other inquiry into, or trial for, any other offence which such answers may tend to 
show he has committed. 
2[(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence Counsel in preparing relevant questions which are to 
be put to the accused and the Court may permit filing of written statement by the accused as sufficient compliance of 
this section.] 
314. Oral arguments and memorandum of arguments.—(1) Any party to a proceeding may, as soon as may 
be, after the close of his evidence, address concise oral arguments, and may, before he concludes the oral arguments, 
if any, submit a memorandum to the Court setting forth concisely and under distinct headings, the arguments in 
support of his case and every such memorandum shall form part of the record. 
(2) A copy of every such memorandum shall be simultaneously furnished to the opposite party. 
(3) No adjournment of the proceedings shall be granted for the purpose of filing the written arguments unless 
the Court, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers it necessary to grant such adjournment. 
(4) The Court may, if it is of opinion that the oral arguments are not concise or relevant, regulate such 
arguments. 
315. Accused person to be competent witness.—(1) Any person accused of an offence before a Criminal 
Court shall be a competent witness for the defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of the charges made 
against him or any person charged together with him at the same trial: 
Provided that— 
(a) he shall not be called as a witness except on his own request in writing; 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 27 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 22 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 

139 
 
(b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by any of the parties or the 
Court or give rise to any presumption against himself or any person charged together with him that the same 
trial. 
(2) Any person against whom proceedings are instituted in any Criminal Court under section 98, or section 107 
or section 108, or section 109, or section 110, or under Chapter IX or under Part B, Part C or Part D of Chapter X, 
may offer himself as a witness in such proceedings: 
Provided that in proceedings under section 108, section 109, or section 110, the failure of such person to give 
evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by any of the parties or the Court or give rise to any 
presumption against him or any other person proceeded against together with him at the same inquiry. 
316. No influence to be used to induce disclosure.—Except as provided in sections 306 and 307, no influence, 
by means of any promise or threat or otherwise, shall be used to an accused person to induce him to disclose or 
withhold any matter within his knowledge. 
317. Provision for inquiries and trial being held in the absence of accused in certain cases.—(1) At any 
stage of an inquiry or trial under this Code, if the Judge or Magistrate is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded, that the 
personal attendance of the accused before the Court is not necessary in the interests of justice, or that the accused 
persistently disturbs the proceedings in Court, the Judge or Magistrate may, if the accused is represented by a 
pleader, dispense with his attendance and proceed with such inquiry or trial in his absence, and may, at any 
subsequent stage of the proceedings, direct the personal attendance of such accused. 
(2) If the accused in any such case is not represented by a pleader, or if the Judge or Magistrate considers his 
personal attendance necessary, he may, if he thinks fit and for reasons to be recorded by him, either adjourn such 
inquiry or trial, or order that the case of such accused be taken up or tried separately. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Gujarat 
In the principal Act, to section 317, the following Explanation shall be added, namely: — 
“Explanation: —For the purpose of this section “Personal attendance of the accused” shall include his 
attendance through the medium of Electronic Video Linkage as provided in section 273.”. 
[Vide Gujarat Act 31 of 2017, s. 6.] 
318. Procedure where accused does not understand proceedings.—If the accused, though not of unsound 
mind, cannot be made to understand the proceedings, the Court may proceed with the inquiry or trial; and, in the 
case of a Court other than a High Court, if such proceedings result in a conviction, the proceedings shall be 
forwarded to the High Court with a report of the circumstances of the case, and the High Court shall pass thereon 
such order as it thinks fit. 
319. Power to proceed against other persons appearing to be guilty of offence.—(1) Where, in the course of 
any inquiry into, or trial of, an offence, it appears from the evidence that any person not being the accused has 
committed any offence for which such person could be tried together with the accused, the Court may proceed 
against such person for the offence which he appears to have committed. 
 (2) Where such person is not attending the Court, he may be arrested or summoned, as the circumstances of the 
case may require, for the purpose aforesaid. 
 (3) Any person attending the Court, although not under arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by such 
Court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or trial of, the offence which he appears to have committed. 
(4) Where the Court proceeds against any person under sub-section (1), then— 
(a) the proceedings in respect of such person shall be commenced afresh, and the witnesses re-heard; 

140 
 
(b) subject to the provisions of clause (a), the case may proceed as if such person had been an accused 
person when the Court took cognizance of the offence upon which the inquiry or trial was commenced. 
320. Compounding of offences.—(1) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal                 
Code (45 of 1860) specified in the first two columns of the Table next following may be compounded by the persons 
mentioned in the third column of that Table:— 
 
1[TABLE 
Offence 
Section of the  
Person by whom offence 
 
Indian Penal 
may be compounded 
 
Code applicable 
 
          1 
2 
3 
Uttering words, etc., with deliberate 
298 
The person whose religious feelings 
intent to wound the religious 
 
are intended to be wounded. 
feelings of any person. 
Voluntarily causing hurt. 
323 
The person to whom the hurt is 
 
 
caused. 
Voluntarily causing hurt on 
334 
Ditto. 
provocation. 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt 
335 
The person to whom the hurt is  
on grave and sudden provocation. 
 
caused. 
Wrongfully restraining or confining 
341, 
The person restrained or confined. 
any person. 
342 
Wrongfully confining a person for 
343 
The person confined. 
three days or more 
Wrongfully confining a person for 
344 
Ditto. 
ten days or more. 
Wrongfully confining a person in 
346 
The person confined. 
secret. 
Assault or use of criminal force. 
352, 
The person assaulted or to whom 
 
355, 
criminal force is used. 
 
358  
Theft. 
379 
The owner of the property stolen. 
Dishonest misappropriation of 
403 
The owner of the property 
property. 
 
misappropriated. 
Criminal breach of trust by a carrier, 
407 
The owner of the property in respect 
wharfinger, etc. 
 
of which the breach of trust has been 
 
 
committed. 
Dishonestly receiving stolen 
411 
The owner of the property stolen. 
property knowing it to be stolen. 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 23, for  the TABLE (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

141 
 
         1 
2 
3 
Assisting in the concealment or 
414 
Ditto. 
disposal of stolen property, knowing 
it to be stolen. 
Cheating. 
417 
The person cheated. 
Cheating by personation. 
419 
Ditto. 
Fraudulent removal or concealment 
421 
The creditors who are affected 
of property, etc., to prevent 
 
thereby. 
distribution among creditors. 
Fraudulently preventing from being 
422 
Ditto. 
made available for his creditors a 
debt or demand due to the offender. 
Fraudulent execution of deed of 
423 
The person affected thereby. 
transfer containing false statement 
of consideration. 
Fraudulent removal or concealment 
424 
Ditto. 
of property. 
Mischief, when the only loss or 
426, 
The person to whom the loss or 
damage caused is loss or damage to 
427 
damage is caused. 
a private person. 
Mischief by killing or maiming 
428 
The owner of the animal. 
animal.  
Mischief by killing or maiming 
429 
The owner of the cattle or animal. 
cattle, etc.  
Mischief by injury to works of 
430 
The person to whom the loss or 
irrigation by wrongfully diverting 
 
damage is caused. 
water when the only loss or damage 
caused is loss or damage to private  
person. 

 
142 
 
          1 
2 
3 
Criminal trespass. 
447 
The person in possession of the property trespassed upon.  
 
House-trespass. 
448 
 Ditto. 
House-trespass to commit an 
451 
The person in possession of the 
offence (other than theft) punishable 
 
house trespassed upon. 
with imprisonment. 
Using a false trade  or property 
482 
The person to whom loss or injury is 
mark. 
 
caused by such use. 
Counterfeiting a trade or property 
483 
    Ditto. 
mark used by another. 
 
 
Knowingly selling, or exposing or 
486 
    Ditto. 
possessing for sale or for 
manufacturing purpose, goods 
marked with a counterfeit property  
mark. 
Criminal breach of contract of 
491 
The person with whom the offender 
service. 
 
has contracted. 
Adultery. 
497 
The husband of the woman. 
Enticing or taking away or detaining 
498 
The husband of the woman and the 
with criminal intent a married 
 
woman 
woman. 
Defamation, except such cases as 
500 
The person defamed. 
are specified against section 500 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)  
in column 1 of the Table under  
sub-section (2). 
Printing or engraving matter, 
501 
    Ditto. 
knowing it to be defamatory. 
Sale of printed or engraved 
502 
    Ditto. 
substance containing defamatory 
matter, knowing it to contain such 
matter. 
Insult intended to provoke a breach 
504 
The person insulted. 
of the peace. 
Criminal intimidation. 
506 
The person intimidated. 
Inducing person to believe himself 
508 
The person induced.] 
an object of divine displeasure.  
 

143 
 
 (2) The offences punishable under the sections of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) specified in the first two 
columns of the Table next following may, with the permission of the Court before which any prosecution for such 
offence is pending, be compounded by the persons mentioned in the third column of that Table:— 
1[TABLE 
       Offence 
Section of the  
Person by whom offence 
 
Indian Penal 
may be compounded 
 
Code applicable 
 
          1 
2 
3 
Causing miscarriage. 
312 
The woman to whom miscarriage is caused . 
 
 
 
 
 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt. 
325 
The person to whom hurt is caused. 
Causing hurt by doing an act so 
337 
Ditto. 
rashly and negligently as to 
endanger human life or the personal 
safety of others. 
Causing grievous hurt by doing an 
338 
    Ditto. 
act so rashly and negligently as to 
endanger human life or the personal 
safety of others. 
Assault or criminal force in attempt- 
357 
The person assaulted or to whom 
ting wrongfully to confine a person. 
 
the force was used.  
 
Theft, by clerk or servant of 
381 
The owner of the property stolen. 
property in possession of master. 
Criminal breach of trust 
406 
The owner of property in respect of 
 
 
which breach of trust has 
 
 
been committed. 
Criminal breach of trust by a clerk  
408 
The owner of the property in respect  
or servant. 
 
of which the breach of trust has been  
 
 
committed. 
Cheating a person whose interest  
418 
The person cheated. 
the offender was bound, either by 
law or by legal contract, to protect. 
Cheating and dishonestly inducing  
420 
The person cheated. 
delivery of property or the making,  
alteration or destruction of a valuable  
security. 
Marrying again during the life-time  
494 
The husband or wife of the person so marrying. 
of a husband or wife. 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 23, for TABLE (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

144 
 
          1 
2 
3 
Defamation against the President or the      500 
The person defamed. 
Vice-President or the Governor of a  
 
 
State or the Administrator of a Union 
territory or a Minister in respect of his 
public functions when instituted upon 
a complaint made by the Public 
Prosecutor.  
Uttering words or sounds or making  
      509 
The woman whom it was intended to 
gestures or exhibiting any object 
 
insult or whose privacy was intruded  
intending to insult the modesty of a 
 
upon.] 
woman or intruding upon the privacy  
of a woman. 
 
1[(3) When an offence is compoundable under this section, the abetment of such offence or an attempt to 
commit such offence (when such attempt is itself an offence) or where the accused is liable under section 34 or 149 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) may be compounded in like manner.]  
(4) (a) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence under this section is under 
the age of eighteen years or is an idiot or a lunatic, any person competent to contract on his behalf may, with the 
permission of the Court, compound such offence. 
(b) When the person who would otherwise be competent to compound an offence under this section is dead, the 
legal representative, as defined in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) of such person may, with the 
consent of the Court, compound such offence. 
(5) When the accused has been committed for trial or when he has been convicted and an appeal is pending, no 
composition for the offence shall be allowed without the leave of the Court to which he is committed, or, as the case 
may be, before which the appeal is to be heard. 
(6) A High Court or Court of Session acting in the exercise of its powers of revision under section 401 may 
allow any person to compound any offence which such person is competent to compound under this section. 
(7) No offence shall be compounded if the accused is, by reason of a previous conviction, liable either to 
enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind for such offence. 
(8) The composition of an offence under this section shall have the effect of an acquittal of the accused with 
whom the offence has been compounded. 
(9) No offence shall be compounded except as provided by this section.  
STATE AMENDMENT 
Madhya Pradesh 
Amendment of Section 320.—In the table below sub-section (2) of Section 320 of the principal Act,- 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 23, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

145 
 
(i) in column first, second and third, before section 324 and entries relating thereto, the following sections and 
entries relating thereto shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Rioting 
147 
The person against whom the force 
or violence is used at the time of 
committing an offence: 
 
 
Provided that the accused is not 
charged with other offence which 
is not compoundable. 
Rioting armed with deadly weapon 
148 
The person against whom the force 
or violence is used at the time of 
committing an offence: 
 
 
Provided that the accused is not 
charged with other offence which 
is not compoundable. 
Obscene acts or use of obscene 
words 
294 
The person against whom obscene 
acts were done or obscene words 
were used.”. 
(ii) in column first, second and third, after section 500 and entries relating thereto, the following section and 
entries relating thereto shall be inserted, namely:— 
“(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Criminal intimidation if threat to 
be caused death or grievous hurt, 
etc. 
Part II of Section 506 
The person against whom the 
offence of Criminal Intimidation 
was committed.”. 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh 17 of 1999, s. 3.] 
 321. Withdrawal from prosecution.—The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a 
case may, with the consent of the Court, at any time before the judgment is pronounced, withdraw from the 
prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or more of the offences for which he is tried; and, 
upon such withdrawal,— 
(a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall be discharged in respect of such offence 
or offences; 
(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this Code no charge is required, he shall be 
acquitted in respect of such offence or offences: 
Provided that where such offence— 
(i) was against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, or 
(ii) was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment under the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or 
(iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property belonging to the Central 
Government, or 
(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while acting or purporting to act 
in the discharge of his official duty, 
and the Prosecutor in charge of the case has not been appointed by the Central Government, he shall not, unless he 
has been permitted by the Central Government to do so, move the Court for its consent to withdraw from the 

146 
 
prosecution and the Court shall, before according consent, direct the Prosecutor to produce before it the permission 
granted by the Central Government to withdraw from the prosecution. 
322. Procedure in cases which Magistrate cannot dispose of.—(1) If, in the course of any inquiry into an 
offence or a trial before a Magistrate in any district, the evidence appears to him to warrant a presumption— 
(a) that he has no jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for trial, or 
(b) that the case is one which should be tried or committed for trial by some other Magistrate in the district, 
or 
(c) that the case should be tried by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he shall stay the proceedings and submit 
the case, with a brief report explaining its nature, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or to such other Magistrate, 
having jurisdiction, as the Chief Judicial Magistrate directs. 
(2) The Magistrate to whom the case is submitted may, if so empowered, either try the case himself, or refer it 
to any Magistrate subordinate to him having jurisdiction, or commit the accused for trial. 
323. Procedure when, after commencement of inquiry or trial, Magistrate finds case should be 
committed.—If, in any inquiry into an offence or a trial before a Magistrate, it appears to him at any stage of the 
proceedings before signing the judgment that the case is one which ought to be tried by the Court of Session, he 
shall commit it to that Court under the provisions hereinbefore contained 1[and thereupon the provisions of Chapter 
XVIII shall apply to the commitment so made]. 
324. Trial of persons previously convicted of offences against coinage, stamp-law or property.— (1) 
Where a person, having been convicted of an offence punishable under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860), with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards, is again accused of any offence 
punishable under either of those Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards, and the 
Magistrate before whom the case is pending is satisfied that there is ground for presuming that such person has 
committed the offence, he shall be sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or committed to the Court of 
Session, unless the Magistrate is competent to try the case and is of opinion that he can himself pass an adequate 
sentence if the accused is convicted. 
 (2) When any person is sent for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate or committed to the Court of Session 
under sub-section (1), any other person accused jointly with him in the same inquiry or trial shall be similarly sent or 
committed, unless the Magistrate discharges such other person under section 239 or section 245, as the case may be. 
325. Procedure when Magistrate cannot pass sentence sufficiently severe.—(1) Whenever a Magistrate is of 
opinion, after hearing the evidence for the prosecution and the accused, that the accused is guilty, and that he ought 
to receive a punishment different in kind from, or more severe than, that which such Magistrate is empowered to 
inflict, or, being a Magistrate of the second class, is of opinion that the accused ought to be required to execute a 
bond under section 106, he may record the opinion and submit his proceedings, and forward the accused, to the 
Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom he is subordinate. 
(2) When more accused than one are being tried together, and the Magistrate considers it necessary to proceed 
under sub-section (1), in regard to any of such accused, he shall forward all the accused, who are in his opinion 
guilty, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 26 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

147 
 
(3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate to whom the proceedings are submitted may, if he thinks fit, examine the 
parties and recall and examine any witness who has already given evidence in the case and may call for and take any 
further evidence and shall pass such judgment, sentence or order in the case as he thinks fit, and is according to law. 
326. Conviction or commitment on evidence partly recorded by one Magistrate and partly by                  
another.—(1) Whenever any 1[Judge or Magistrate], after having heard and recorded the whole or any part of the 
evidence in any enquiry or a trial, ceases to exercise jurisdiction therein and is succeeded by another 1[Judge or 
Magistrate] who has and who exercises such jurisdiction, the 1[Judge or Magistrate] so succeeding may act on the 
evidence so recorded by his predecessor, or partly recorded by his predecessor and partly recorded by himself: 
Provided that if the succeeding 1[Judge or Magistrate] is of opinion that further examination of any of the 
witnesses whose evidence has already been recorded is necessary in the interests of Justice, he may re-summon any 
such witness, and after such further examination, cross-examination and re-examination, if any, as he may permit, 
the witness shall be discharged. 
(2) When a case is transferred under the provisions of this Code 2[from one judge to another Judge or from one 
Magistrate to another Magistrate], the former shall be deemed to cease to exercise jurisdiction therein, and to be 
succeeded by the latter, within the meaning of sub-section (1). 
(3) Nothing in this section applies to summary trials or to cases in which proceedings have been stayed under 
section 322 or in which proceedings have been submitted to a superior Magistrate under section 325. 
327. Court to be open.—3[(1)] The place in which any Criminal Court is held for the purpose of inquiring into 
or trying any offence shall be deemed to be an open Court, to which the public generally may have access, so far as 
the same can conveniently contain them: 
Provided that the presiding Judge or Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, order at any stage of any inquiry into, or 
trial of, any particular case, that the public generally, or any particular person, shall not have access to, or be or 
remain in, the room or building used by the Court. 
4[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section (1), the inquiry into and trial of rape or an offence 
under section 376, 5[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, 
section 376DB] section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)] shall be conducted in camera : 
Provided that the presiding Judge may, if he thinks fit, or on an application made by either of the parties, allow 
any particular person to have access to, or be or remain in,  the room or building used by the Court: 
6[Provided further that in camera trial shall be conducted as far as practicable by a woman Judge or Magistrate.]  
(3) Where any proceedings are held under sub-section (2), it shall not be lawful for any person to print or 
publish any matter in relation to any such proceedings except with the previous permission of the Court:] 
 6[Provided that the ban on printing or publication of trial proceedings in relation to an offence of rape may be 
lifted, subject to maintaining confidentiality of name and address of the parties.]  
 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 27, for “Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “from one Magistrate to another Magistrate”(w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 
3. S. 327 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 43 of 1983, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-12-1983).  
4. Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-12-1978). 
5. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 17, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
6. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 24 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 

148 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Chhattisgarh 
In sub-section (2) of the section 327 of the Code, for the words, figures and letters “or an offence under section 
376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code”, the words, 
figures, letters and punctuations “sexual harassment, outraging modesty of woman or an offence under section 354, 
section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 354E, section 376, section 376A, section 376B, 
section 376C, section 376D, section 376E, section 376F, section 509, section 509A or section 509B of the Indian 
Penal Code” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 12.] 
 
CHAPTER XXV 
PROVISIONS AS TO ACCUSED PERSONS OF UNSOUND MIND 
328. Procedure in case of accused being lunatic.—(1) When a Magistrate holding an inquiry has reason to 
believe that the person against whom the inquiry is being held is of unsound mind and consequently incapable of 
making his defence, the Magistrate shall inquire into the fact of such unsoundness of mind, and shall cause such 
person to be examined by the civil surgeon of the district or such other medical officer as the State Government may 
direct, and thereupon shall examine such surgeon or other officer as a witness, and shall reduce the examination to 
writing.  
1[(1A) If the civil surgeon finds the accused to be of unsound mind, he shall refer such person to a psychiatrist 
or clinical psychologist for care, treatment and prognosis of the condition and the psychiatrist or clinical 
psychologist, as the case may be, shall inform the Magistrate whether the accused is suffering from unsoundness of 
mind or mental retardation: 
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as 
the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of— 
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest government hospital; and 
 (b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college.]  
(2) Pending such examination and inquiry, the Magistrate may deal with such person in accordance with the 
provisions of section 330. 
2[(3) If such Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (1A) is a person of unsound mind, 
the Magistrate shall further determine whether the unsoundness of mind renders the accused incapable of entering 
defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall record a finding to that effect, and shall 
examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of the accused but 
without questioning the accused, if he finds that no prima facie case is made out against the accused, he shall, 
instead of postponing the enquiry, discharge the accused and deal with him in the manner provided under        
section 330: 
Provided that if the Magistrate finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused in respect of whom 
a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he shall postpone the proceeding for such period, as in the opinion of 
the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused, and order the accused to be 
dealt with as provided under section 330. 
(4) If such Magistrate is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (1A) is a person with mental 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009,  s. 25,  (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for sub-section (3)  (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

149 
 
retardation, the Magistrate shall further determine whether the mental retardation renders the accused incapable of 
entering defence, and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate shall order closure of the inquiry and deal 
with the accused in the manner provided under section 330.]  
329. Procedure in case of person of unsound mind tried before Court.—(1) If at the trial of any person 
before a Magistrate or Court of Session, it appears to the Magistrate or Court that such person is of unsound mind 
and consequently incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate or Court shall, in the first instance, try the fact of 
such unsoundness and incapacity, and if the Magistrate or Court, after considering such medical and other evidence 
as may be produced before him or it, is satisfied of the fact, he or it shall record a finding to that effect and shall 
postpone further proceedings in the case. 
1[(1A) If during trial, the Magistrate or Court of Sessions finds the accused to be of unsound mind, he or it shall 
refer such person to a psychiatrist or clinical psychologist for care and treatment, and the psychiatrist or clinical 
psychologist, as the case may be  shall report to the Magistrate or Court whether the accused is suffering from 
unsoundness of mind: 
Provided that if the accused is aggrieved by the information given by the psychiatric or clinical psychologist, as 
the case may be, to the Magistrate, he may prefer an appeal before the Medical Board which shall consist of— 
(a) head of psychiatry unit in the nearest government hospital; and 
(b) a faculty member in psychiatry in the nearest medical college.]  
2[(2) If such Magistrate or Court is informed that the person referred to in sub-section (1A) is a person of 
unsound mind, the Magistrate or Court shall further determine whether unsoundness of mind renders the accused 
incapable of entering defence and if the accused is found so incapable, the Magistrate or Court shall record a finding 
to that effect and shall examine the record of evidence produced by the prosecution and after hearing the advocate of 
the accused but without questioning the accused, if the Magistrate or Court finds that no prima facie case is made 
out against the accused, he or it shall, instead of postponing the trial, discharge the accused and deal with him in the 
manner provided under section 330: 
Provided that if the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused in respect 
of whom a finding of unsoundness of mind is arrived at, he shall postpone the trial for such period, as in the opinion 
of the psychiatrist or clinical psychologist, is required for the treatment of the accused. 
(3) If the Magistrate or Court finds that a prima facie case is made out against the accused and he is incapable of 
entering defence by reason of mental retardation, he or it shall not hold the trial and order the accused to be dealt 
with in accordance with section 330.]  
3[330. Release of person of unsound mind pending investigation or trial.—(1) Whenever a person if found 
under section 328 or section 329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason of unsoundness of mind or mental 
retardation, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be shall, whether the case is one in which bail may be taken or 
not, order release of such person on bail: 
Provided that the accused is suffering from unsoundness of mind or mental retardation which does not mandate 
in-patient treatment and a friend or relative undertakes to obtain regular out-patient psychiatric treatment from the 
nearest medical facility and to prevent from doing injury to himself or to any other person. 
(2) If the case is one in which, in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, bail cannot be 
granted or if an appropriate undertaking is not given, he or it shall order the accused to be kept in such a place where 
regular psychiatric treatment can be provided, and shall report the action taken to the State Government: 
Provided that no order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic asylum shall be made otherwise than in 
accordance with such rules as the State Government may have made under the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 
1987). 
(3) Whenever a person is found under section 328 or section 329 to be incapable of entering defence by reason 
of unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, shall keeping in view the 
nature of the act committed and the extent of unsoundness of mind or mental retardation, further determine if the 
release of the accused can be ordered: 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 26 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009) 
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for sub-section (2), (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for section 330 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 

150 
 
Provided that— 
(a) if on the basis of medical opinion or opinion of a specialist, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, 
decide to order discharge of the accused, as provided under section 328 or section 329, such release may be 
ordered, if sufficient security is given that the accused shall be prevented from doing injury to himself or to any 
other person; 
(b) if the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, is of opinion that discharge of the accused cannot be 
ordered, the transfer of the accused to a residential facility for persons of unsound mind or mental retardation 
may be ordered wherein the accused may be provided care and appropriate education and training.]  
331. Resumption of inquiry or trial.—(1) Whenever an inquiry or a trial is postponed under section 328 or 
section 329, the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, may at any time after the person concerned has ceased to 
be of unsound mind, resume the inquiry or trial and require the accused to appear or be brought before such 
Magistrate or Court. 
(2) When the accused has been released under section 330, and the sureties for his appearance produce him to 
the officer whom the Magistrate or Court appoints in this behalf, the certificate of such officer that the accused is 
capable of making his defence shall be receivable in evidence. 
332. Procedure on accused appearing before Magistrate or Court.—(1) If, when the accused appears or is 
again brought before the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, the Magistrate or Court considers him capable of 
making his defence, the inquiry or trial shall proceed. 
(2) If the Magistrate or Court considers the accused to be still incapable of making his defence, the Magistrate 
or Court shall act according to the provisions of section 328 or section 329, as the case may be, and if the accused is 
found to be of unsound mind and consequently incapable making his defence, shall deal with such accused in 
accordance with the provisions of section 330. 
333. When accused appears to have been of sound mind.—When the accused appears to be of sound mind at 
the time of inquiry or trial, and the Magistrate is satisfied from the evidence given before him that there is reason to 
believe that the accused committed an act, which, if he had been of sound mind, would have been an offence, and 
that he was, at the time when the act was committed, by reason of unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the 
nature of the act or that it was wrong or contrary to law, the Magistrate shall proceed with the case, and, if the 
accused ought to be tried by the Court of Session, commit him for trial before the Court of Session. 
334. Judgment of acquittal on ground of unsoundness of mind.—Whenever any person is acquitted upon the 
ground that, at the time at which he is alleged to have committed an offence, he was, by reason of unsoundness of 
mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act alleged as constituting the offence, or that it was wrong or contrary 
to law, the finding shall state specifically whether he committed the act or not. 
335. Person acquitted on such ground to be detained in safe custody.—(1) Whenever the finding states that 
the accused person committed the act alleged, the Magistrate or Court before whom or which the trial has been held, 
shall, if such act would, but for the incapacity found, have constituted an offence,— 
 (a) order such person to be detained in safe custody in such place and manner as the Magistrate or Court 
thinks fit; or 
(b) order such person to be delivered to any relative or friend of such person. 
(2) No order for the detention of the accused in a lunatic asylum shall be made under clause (a) of sub-section 
(1) otherwise than in accordance with such rules as the State Government may have made under the Indian Lunacy 
Act, 1912 (4 of 1912). 
(3) No order for the delivery of the accused to a relative or friend shall be made under clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) except upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving security to the satisfaction of the 
Magistrate or Court that the person delivered shall— 
(a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person; 
(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the State Government 
may direct. 

151 
 
(4) The Magistrate or Court shall report to the State Government the action taken under sub-section (1). 
336. Power of State Government to empower officer-in-charge to discharge.—The State Government may 
empower the officer in charge of the jail in which a person is confined under the provisions of section 330 or section 
335 to discharge all or any of the functions of the Inspector-General of Prisons under section 337 or section 338. 
337. Procedure where lunatic prisoner is reported capable of making his defence.—If such person is 
detained under the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 330, and in the case of a person detained in a jail, the 
Inspector-General of Prisons, or, in the case of a person detained a lunatic asylum, the visitors of such asylum, or 
any two of them shall certify that, in his or their opinion, such person is capable of making his defence, he shall be 
taken before the Magistrate or Court, as the case may be, at such time as the Magistrate or Court appoints, and the 
Magistrate or Court shall deal with such person under the provisions of section 332; and the certificate of such 
Inspector-General or visitors as aforesaid shall be receivable as evidence. 
338. Procedure where lunatic detained is declared fit to be released.—(1) If such person is detained under 
the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 330, or section 335, and such Inspector-General or visitors shall certify 
that, in his or their judgment, he may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other 
person, the State Government may thereupon order him to be released, or to be detained in custody, or to be 
transferred to a public lunatic asylum if he has not been already sent to such an asylum; and, in case it orders him to 
be transferred to an asylum, may appoint a Commission, consisting of a Judicial and two medical officers. 
(2) Such Commission shall make a formal inquiry into the state of mind of such person, take such evidence as is 
necessary, and shall report to the State Government, which may order his release or detention as it thinks fit. 
339. Delivery of lunatic to care of relative or friend.—(1) Whenever any relative or friend of any person 
detained under the provisions of section 330 or section 335 desires that he shall be delivered to his care and custody, 
the State Government may, upon the application of such relative or friend and on his giving security to the 
satisfaction of such State Government, that the person delivered shall— 
(a) be properly taken care of and prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other person; 
(b) be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the State Government 
may direct; 
(c) in the case of a person detained under sub-section (2) of section 330, be produced when required before 
such Magistrate or Court,  
order such person to be delivered to such relative or friend. 
 (2) If the person so delivered is accused of any offence, the trial of which has been postponed by reason of his 
being of unsound mind and incapable of making his defence, and the inspecting officer referred to in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1), certifies at any time to the Magistrate or Court that such person is capable of making his defence, 
such Magistrate or Court shall call upon the relative or friend to whom such accused was delivered to produce him 
before the Magistrate or Court; and, upon such production the Magistrate or Court shall proceed in accordance with 
the provisions of section 332, and the certificate of the inspecting office shall be receivable as evidence. 
CHAPTER XXVI 
PROVISIONS AS TO OFFENCES AFFECTING THE ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE 
340. Procedure in cases mentioned in section 195.—(1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or 
otherwise, any Court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of Justice that an inquiry should be made into 
any offence referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 195, which appears to have been committed in or in 
relation to a proceeding in that Court or, as the case may be, in respect of a document produced or given in evidence  
 

152 
 
in a proceeding in that Court, such Court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,— 
(a) record a finding to that effect; 
(b) make a complaint thereof in writing; 
(c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction; 
(d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged 
offence is non-bailable and the Court thinks it necessary so to do, send the accused in custody to such 
Magistrate; and 
(e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before such Magistrate. 
(2) The power conferred on a Court by sub-section (1) in respect of an offence may, in any case where that 
Court has neither made a complaint under sub-section (1) in respect of that offence nor rejected an application for 
the making of such complaint, be exercised by the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the 
meaning of sub-section (4) of section 195. 
 (3) A complaint made under this section shall be signed,— 
(a) where the Court making the complaint is a High Court, by such officer of the Court as the Court may 
appoint; 
1[(b) in any other case, by the presiding officer of the Court or by such officer of the Court as the Court 
may authorise in writing in this behalf.] 
 (4) In this section, “Court” has the same meaning as in section 195. 
341. Appeal.—(1) Any person on whose application any Court other than a High Court has refused to make a 
complaint under sub-section (1)  or sub-section (2) of section 340, or against whom such a complaint has been made 
by such Court, may appeal to the Court to which such former Court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section 
(4) of section 195, and the superior Court may thereupon, after notice to the parties concerned, direct the withdrawal 
of the complaint, or, as the case may be, making of the complaint which such former Court might have made under 
section 340, and, if it makes such complaint, the provisions of that section shall apply accordingly. 
(2) An order under this section, and subject to any such order, an order under section 340, shall be final, and 
shall not be subject to revision. 
342. Power to order costs.—Any Court dealing with an application made to it for filing a complaint under 
section 340 or an appeal under section 341, shall have power to make such order as to costs as may be just. 
343. Procedure of Magistrate taking cognizance.—(1) A Magistrate to whom a complaint is made under 
section 340 or section 341 shall, notwithstanding anything contained in Chapter XV, proceed, as far as may be, to 
deal with the case as if it were instituted on a police report. 
(2) Where it is brought to the notice of such Magistrate, or of any other Magistrate to whom the case may have 
been transferred, that an appeal is pending against the decision arrived at in the judicial proceeding out of which the 
matter has arisen, he may, if he thinks fit, at any stage, adjourn the hearing of the case until such appeal is decided. 
344. Summary procedure for trial for giving false evidence.—(1) If, at the time of delivery of any judgment 
or final order disposing of any judicial proceeding, a Court of Session or Magistrate of the first class expresses an 
opinion to the effect that any witness appearing in such proceeding had knowingly or wilfully given false evidence 
or had fabricated false evidence with the intention that such evidence should be used in such proceeding, it or he 
may, if satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the interest of justice that the witness should be tried summarily 
for giving or fabricating, as the case may be, false evidence, take cognizance of the offence and may, after giving the 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 6, for clause (b) (w.e.f. 16-4-2006). 

153 
 
offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished for such offence, try such 
offender summarily and sentence him to imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or to fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for 
summary trials. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect the power of the Court to make a complaint under section 340 for the 
offence, where it does not choose to proceed under this section. 
(4) Where, after any action is initiated under sub-section (1), it is made to appear to the Court of Session or 
Magistrate of the first class that an appeal or an application for revision has been preferred or filed against the 
judgment or order in which the opinion referred to in that sub-section has been expressed, it or he shall stay further 
proceedings of the trial until the disposal of the appeal or the application for revision, as the case may be, and 
thereupon the further proceedings of the trial shall abide by the results of the appeal or application for revision. 
345. Procedure in certain cases of contempt.—(1) When any such offence as is described in section 175, 
section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is committed in the view 
or presence of any Civil, Criminal, or Revenue Court, the Court may cause the offender to be detained in custody, 
and may, at any time before the rising of the Court or the same day, take cognizance of the offence and, after giving 
the offender a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence 
the offender to fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, and, in default of payment of fine, to simple imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one month, unless such fine be sooner paid. 
(2) In every such case the Court shall record the fact constituting the offence, with the statement (if any) made 
by the offender, as well as the finding and sentence. 
 (3) If the offence is under section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the record shall show the nature 
and stage of the judicial proceeding in which the Court interrupted or insulted was sitting, and the nature of the 
interruption or insult. 
346.  Procedure where Court  considers that case should not be dealt with under section 345.—(1) If the 
Court in any case considers that a person accused of any of the offences  referred to in section 345 and committed in its 
view or presence should be imprisoned otherwise than in default of payment of fine, or that a fine exceeding two 
hundred rupees should be imposed upon him, or such Court is for any other reason of opinion that the case should not 
be disposed of under section 345, such Court, after recording  the facts constituting the offence and the statement of the 
accused as hereinbefore provided, may forward  the case to a  Magistrate  having  jurisdiction  to try  the same, and 
may require security to be given for the appearance of such person before such Magistrate, or if sufficient security is 
not given, shall forward such person in custody to such Magistrate. 
(2) The Magistrate to whom any case is forwarded under this section shall proceed to deal with, as far as may 
be, as if it were instituted on a police report. 
347. When Registrar or Sub-Registrar to be deemed a Civil Court.—When the State Government so directs, 
any Registrar or any Sub-Registrar appointed under the 1*** Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), shall be deemed to 
be a Civil Court within the meaning of sections 345 and 346. 
348. Discharge of offender on submission of apology.—When any Court has under section 345 adjudged an 
offender to punishment, or has under section 346 forwarded him to a Magistrate for trial, for refusing or omitting to 
do anything which he was lawfully required to do or for any intentional insult or interruption, the Court may, in its 
discretion, discharge the offender or remit the punishment on his submission to the order or requisition of such 
Court, or on apology being made to its satisfaction. 
349. Imprisonment or committal of person refusing to answer or produce document.—If any witness or 
person called to produce a document or thing before a Criminal Court refuses to answer such questions as are put to 
him or to produce any document or thing in his possession or power which the Court requires him to produce, and 
                                                 
1. The word “Indian” omitted by Act 56 of 1974, s. 3 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 20-12-1974). 

154 
 
does not, after a reasonable opportunity has been given to him so to do, offer any reasonable excuse for such refusal, 
such Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, sentence him to simple imprisonment, or by warrant under the 
hand of the Presiding Magistrate or Judge commit him to the custody of an officer of the Court for any term not 
exceeding seven days, unless in the meantime, such person consents to be examined and to answer, or to produce the 
document or thing and in the event of his persisting in his refusal, he may be dealt with according to the provisions 
of section 345 or section 346. 
350. Summary procedure for punishment for non-attendance by a witness in obedience to summons.—(1) 
If any witness being summoned to appear before a Criminal Court is legally bound to appear at a certain place and 
time in obedience to the summons and without just excuse neglects or refuses to attend at that place or time or 
departs from the place where he has to attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, and the Court 
before which the witness is to appear is satisfied that it is expedient in the interest of justice that such a witness 
should be tried summarily, the Court may take cognizance of the offence and after giving the offender an 
opportunity of showing cause why he should not be punished under this section, sentence him to fine not exceeding 
one hundred rupees. 
(2) In every such case the Court shall follow, as nearly as may be practicable, the procedure prescribed for 
summary trials. 
351. Appeals from convictions under sections 344, 345, 349 and 350.—(1) Any person sentenced by any 
Court other than a High Court under section 344, section 345, section 349, or section 350 may, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Code appeal to the Court to which decrees or orders made in such Court are ordinarily 
appealable. 
(2) The provisions of Chapter XXIX shall, so far as they are applicable, apply to appeals under this section, and 
the Appellate Court may alter or reverse the finding, or reduce or reverse the sentence appealed against. 
(3) An appeal from such conviction by a Court of Small Causes shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions 
division within which such Court is situate. 
 (4) An appeal from such conviction by any Registrar or Sub-Registrar deemed to be a Civil Court by virtue of a 
direction issued under section 347 shall lie to the Court of Session for the sessions division within which the office 
of such Registrar or Sub-Registrar is situate. 
352. Certain Judges and Magistrates not to try certain offences when committed before themselves.—
Except as provided in sections 344, 345, 349 and 350, no Judge of a Criminal Court (other than a Judge of a High 
Court) or Magistrate shall try any person for any offence referred to in section 195, when such offence is committed 
before himself or in contempt of his authority, or is brought under his notice as such Judge or Magistrate in the 
course of a judicial proceeding. 
CHAPTER XXVII 
THE JUDGMENT 
353. Judgment.—(1) The judgment in every trial in any Criminal Court or original jurisdiction shall be 
pronounced in open Court by the presiding officer immediately after the termination of the trial or at some 
subsequent time of which notice shall be given to the parties or their pleaders,— 
(a) by delivering the whole of the judgment; or 
(b) by reading out the whole of the judgment; or  
(c) by reading out the operative part of the judgment and explaining the substance of the judgment in a 
language which is understood by the accused or his pleader. 
(2) Where the judgment is delivered under clause (a) of sub-section (1), the presiding officer shall cause it to be 
taken down in short-hand, sign the transcript and every page thereof as soon as it is made ready, and write on it the 
date of the delivery of the judgment in open Court. 

155 
 
(3) Where the judgment or the operative part thereof is read out under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1), 
as the case may be, it shall be dated and signed by the presiding officer in open Court, and if it is not written with his 
own hand, every page of the judgment shall be signed by him. 
(4) Where the judgment is pronounced in the manner specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1), the whole 
judgment or a copy thereof shall be immediately made available for the perusal of the parties or their pleaders free 
of cost. 
(5) If the accused is in custody, he shall be brought up to hear the judgment pronounced. 
(6) If the accused is not in custody, he shall be required by the Court to attend to hear the judgment pronounced, 
except where his personal attendance during the trial has been dispensed with and the sentence is one of fine only or 
he is acquitted: 
Provided that, where there are more accused than one, and one or more of them do not attend the Court on the 
date on which the judgment is to be pronounced, the presiding officer may, in order to avoid undue delay in the 
disposal of the case, pronounce the judgment notwithstanding their absence. 
 (7) No judgment delivered by any Criminal Court shall be deemed to be invalid by reason only of the absence 
of any party or his pleader on the day or from the place notified for the delivery thereof, or of any omission to serve, 
or defect in serving, on the parties or their pleaders, or any of them, the notice of such day and place. 
(8) Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the extent of the provisions of section 465. 
354. Language and contents of judgment.—(1) Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code, every 
judgment referred to in section 353,— 
(a) shall be written in the language of the Court; 
(b) shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for the decision; 
 (c) shall specify the offence (if any) of which, and the section of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or 
other law under which, the accused is convicted, and the punishment to which he is sentenced; 
(d) if it be a judgment of acquittal, shall state the offence of which the accused is acquitted and direct that 
he be set at liberty. 
(2) When the conviction is under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and it is doubtful under which of two 
sections, or under which of two parts of the same section, of that Code the offence falls, the Court shall distinctly 
express the same, and pass judgment in the alternative. 
(3) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with death or, in the alternative, with imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment for a term of years, the judgment shall state the reasons for the sentence awarded, and, in the case 
of sentence of death, the special reasons for such sentence. 
(4) When the conviction is for an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term of one year or more, but the 
Court imposes a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than three months, it shall record its reasons for 
awarding such sentence, unless the sentence is one of imprisonment till the rising of the Court or unless the case was 
tried summarily under the provisions of this Code. 
(5) When any person is sentenced to death, the sentence shall direct that he be hanged by the neck till he is 
dead. 
(6) Every order under section 117 or sub-section (2) of section 138 and every final order made under section 
125, section 145 or section 147 shall contain the point or points for determination, the decision thereon and the 
reasons for the decision. 

156 
 
355. Metropolitan Magistrate's judgment.—Instead of recording a judgment in the manner hereinbefore 
provided, a Metropolitan Magistrate shall record the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) the serial number of the case; 
(b) the date of the commission of the offence; 
(c) the name of the complainant (if any); 
(d) the name of the accused person, and his parentage and residence; 
(e) the offence complained of or proved; 
(f) the plea of the accused and his examination (if any);  
(g) the final order; 
(h) the date of such order;                                   
(i) in all cases in which an appeal lies from the final order either under section 373 or under sub-section (3) 
of section 374, a brief statement of the reasons for the decision. 
356. Order for notifying address of previously convicted offender.—(1) When any person, having been 
convicted by a Court in India of an offence punishable under section 215, section 489A, section 489B, section 489C 
or section 489D 1[or section 506 (in so far as it relates to criminal intimidation punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both)] of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or of any 
offence punishable under Chapter XII  1[or Chapter XVI] or Chapter XVII of that Code, with imprisonment for a 
term of three years, or upwards, is again convicted of any offence punishable under any of those sections or 
Chapters with imprisonment for a term of three years or upwards by any Court other than that of a Magistrate of the 
second class, such Court may, if it thinks fit, at the time of passing a sentence of imprisonment on such person, also 
order that his residence and any change of, or absence from, such residence after release be notified as hereinafter 
provided for a term not exceeding five years from the date of the expiration of such sentence. 
 (2) The provisions of sub-section (1) with reference to the offences named therein, apply also to criminal 
conspiracies to commit such offences and to the abatement of such offences and attempts to commit them. 
(3) If such conviction is set aside on appeal or otherwise, such order shall become void. 
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision. 
(5) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this section relating to 
the notification of residence or change of, or absence from, residence by released convicts. 
(6) Such rules may provide for punishment for the breach thereof and any person charged with a breach of any 
such rule may be tried by a Magistrate of competent jurisdiction in the district in which the place last notified by him 
as his place of residence is situated. 
357. Order to pay compensation.—(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a 
sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing judgment, order the whole or any part of 
the fine recovered to be applied— 
(a) in defraying the expenses of properly incurred in the prosecution; 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 29 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

157 
 
(b) in the payment to any person of compensation for any loss or injury caused by the offence, when 
compensation is, in the opinion of the Court, recoverable by such person in a Civil Court; 
(c) when any person is convicted of any offence for having caused the death of another person or of having 
abetted the commission of such an offence, in paying compensation to the persons who are, under the Fatal 
Accidents Act, 1855 (13 of 1855), entitled to recover damages from the person sentenced for the loss resulting 
to them from such death; 
(d) when any person is convicted of any offence which includes theft, criminal misappropriation, criminal 
breach of trust, or cheating, or of having dishonestly received or retained, or of having voluntarily assisted in 
disposing of, stolen property knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen, in compensating any 
bona fide purchaser of such property for the loss of the same if such property is restored to the possession of the 
person entitled thereto. 
(2) If the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to appeal no such payment shall be made before the period 
allowed for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal be presented, before the decision of the appeal. 
(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to 
the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been so 
sentenced. 
(4) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision. 
(5) At the time of awarding compensation in any subsequent civil suit relating to the same matter, the Court  
shall take into account any sum paid or recovered as compensation under this section. 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Karnataka 
Amendments of section 357. — 
In section 357 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974).— 
(1) In section 357, in sub-section (1), after the words “the Court may” the brackets, figures and words 
“and where the person against whom an offence is committed belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe as defined in clauses (24) and (25) of Article 366 of the Constitution and the accused 
person doesn’t belong to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe the Court shall”, shall be inserted: 
(2) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(3) When a Court imposes a sentence of which the fine does not form a part, the Court may, and 
where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe 
as defined in clauses (24) and (25) of article 366 of the Constitution and the accused person does not 
belong to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, the Court shall, when passing judgment, order the 
accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to the 
person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been so 
sentenced”. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 27 of 1987, s. 2]. 
 
Madhya Pradesh  
Amendment of section 357.—In section 357 of the Principal Act, — 
 (i) In sub-section (1), for the brackets, figure and words “(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine 

158 
 
or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied” the brackets, figure and words 
“(1) When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine 
forms a part, the Court may, and where a person against whom an offence is committed belongs to  
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as defined in clauses (24) and (25) and of Article 366 of the 
Constitution except when both the accused person and the person against whom an offence is committed 
belong cither to such Castes or Tribes, the Court shall, when passing judgment, order the whole or any 
part of the fine recovered to be applied—”shall be substituted; and 
(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(3) When Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and where a 
person against whom an offence is committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes as 
defined in clauses (24) and (25) of Article 366 of the Constitution, the Court shall when passing judgment 
order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such amount as may be specified in the order to 
the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the act for which the accused person has been 
so sentenced: 
“Provided that the Court may not order the accused person to pay by way of compensation any amount 
if both the accused person and the person against whom an offence is committed belong either to the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.” 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 29 of 1978, s. 3.] 
West Bengal 
In section 357 of the principal Act,—  
(a) In sub-section (1), for the words and brackets “When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a 
sentence including a (sentence of death) of which fine forms a part, the Court may, when passing 
judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied—”, the words and brackets 
“When a Court imposes a sentence of fine or a sentence (including a sentence of death) of which fine 
forms a part, the Court may, and where the person against whom an offence has been committed belongs 
to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes, except when both the accused person and the person against 
whom an offence has been committed belong either to Scheduled Castes or to Scheduled Tribes shall, 
when passing judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine recovered to be applied—” shall be 
substituted; 
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(3) When a Court imposes a sentence, of which fine does not form a part, the Court may, and where 
the person against whom an offence has been committed belongs to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled 
Tribes, shall, when passing judgment order the accused person to pay, by way of compensation, such 
amount as may be specified in the order to the person who has suffered any loss or injury by reason of the 
act for which the accused person has been so sentenced: 
Provided that the Court may not order the accused person to pay by way of compensation, any amount 
if both the accused person and the person against whom an offence has been committed belong either to 
Scheduled Castes or to Scheduled Tribes.”; 
(c) after sub-section (5), the following Explanation shall be inserted:— 
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of the section the expression “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled 
Tribes” shall have the meaning respectively assigned to them in clauses (24) and (25) of Article 366 of 
the Constitution of India.’.  
[Vide West Bengal Act 33 of 1985, s. 3.] 

159 
 
1[357A. Victim compensation scheme.—(1) Every State Government in co-ordination with the Central 
Government shall prepare a scheme for providing funds for the purpose of compensation to the victim or his 
dependents who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the crime and who require rehabilitation. 
(2) Whenever a recommendation is made by the Court for compensation, the District Legal Service Authority or 
the State Legal Service Authority, as the case may be, shall decide the quantum of compensation to be awarded 
under the scheme referred to in sub-section (1). 
(3) If the trial Court, at the conclusion of the trial, is satisfied, that the compensation awarded 
under section 357 is not adequate for such rehabilitation, or where the cases end in acquittal or discharge and the 
victim has to be rehabilitated, it may make recommendation for compensation. 
(4) Where the offender is not traced or identified, but the victim is identified, and where no trial takes place, the 
victim or his dependents may make an application to the State or the District Legal Services Authority for award of 
compensation. 
(5) On receipt of such recommendations or on the application under sub-section (4), the State or the District 
Legal Services Authority shall, after due enquiry award adequate compensation by completing the enquiry within 
two months. 
(6) The State or the District Legal Services Authority, as the case may be, to alleviate the suffering of the 
victim, may order for immediate first-aid facility or medical benefits to be made available free of cost on the 
certificate of the police officer not below the rank of the officer in charge of the police station or a Magistrate of the 
area concerned, or any other interim relief as the appropriate authority deems fit.] 
2[357B. Compensation to be in addition to fine under section 326A or section 376D of Indian Penal 
Code.—The compensation payable by the State Government under section 357A shall be in addition to the payment 
of fine to the victim 3[under section 326A, section 376AB, section 376D, section 376DA and section 376DB of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)]. 
357C. Treatment of victims.—All hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central Government, the 
State Government, local bodies or any other person, shall immediately, provide the first-aid or medical treatment, 
free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under section 326A, 376, 4[376A, 376AB, 376B, 376C, 376D, 
376DA, 376DB] or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and shall immediately inform the police of 
such incident.] 
358. Compensation to persons groundlessly arrested.—(1) Whenever any person causes a police officer to 
arrest another person, if it appears to the Magistrate by  whom the case is heard that there was no sufficient ground 
for causing such arrest, the Magistrate may award such compensation, not exceeding 5[one thousand rupees], to be 
paid by the person so causing the arrest to the person so arrested, for his loss of time and expenses in the matter, as 
the Magistrate thinks fit. 
(2) In such cases, if more persons than one are arrested, the Magistrate may, in like manner, award to each of 
them such compensation, not exceeding 5[one thousand rupees], as such Magistrate thinks fit. 
 (3) All compensation awarded under this section may be recovered as if it were a fine, and, if it cannot be so 
recovered, the person by whom it is payable shall be sentenced to simple imprisonment for such term not exceeding 
thirty days as the Magistrate directs, unless such sum is sooner paid. 
359. Order to pay costs in non-cognizable cases.—(1) Whenever any complaint of a non-cognizable offence 
is made to a Court, the Court, if it convicts the accused, may, in addition to the penalty imposed upon him, order him 
to pay to the complainant, in whole or in part, the cost incurred by him in the prosecution, and may further order that 
in default of payment, the accused shall suffer simple imprisonment for a period not exceeding thirty days and such 
costs may include any expenses incurred in respect of process-fees, witnesses and pleader's fees which the Court 
may consider reasonable. 
(2) An order under this section may also be made by an Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of 
Session when exercising its powers of revision. 
360. Order to release on probation of good conduct or after admonition.—(1) When any person not under 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 28 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 23 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 18, for “under section 326A or section 376D of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)” (w.e.f. 21-4-
2018). 
4. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “376A, 376B, 376C, 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 30, for “one hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

160 
 
twenty-one years of age is convicted of an offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of 
seven years or less, or when any person under twenty-one years of age or any woman is convicted of an offence not 
punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved against the offender, if it 
appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard being had to the age, character or antecedents of the 
offender, and to the circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is expedient that  the  offender should 
be released on probation of good conduct,  the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, 
direct that he be released on his entering into a bond, with or without sureties, to appear and receive sentence when 
called upon during such period (not exceeding three years) as the Court may direct, and in the meantime to keep the 
peace and be of good behaviour: 
Provided that where any first offender is convicted by a Magistrate of the second class not specially empowered 
by the High Court, and the Magistrate is of opinion that the powers conferred by this section should be exercised, he 
shall record his opinion to that effect, and submit the proceedings to a Magistrate of the first class, forwarding the 
accused to, or taking bail for his appearance before, such Magistrate, who shall dispose of the case in the manner 
provided by sub-section (2). 
(2) Where proceedings are submitted to a Magistrate of the first class as provided by sub-section (1), such Magistrate 
may thereupon pass such sentence or make such order as he might have passed or made if the case had originally been 
heard by him, and, if he thinks further inquiry or additional evidence on any point to be necessary, he may make such 
inquiry or take such evidence himself or direct such inquiry or evidence to be made or taken. 
(3) In any case in which a person is convicted of theft, theft in a building, dishonest misappropriation, cheating 
or any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), punishable with not more than two years, imprisonment or 
any offence punishable with fine only and no previous conviction is proved against him, the Court before which he 
is so convicted may, if it thinks fit, having regard to the age, character, antecedents or physical or mental condition 
of the offender and to the trivial nature of the offence or any extenuating circumstances under which the offence was 
committed, instead of sentencing him to any punishment, release him after due admonition. 
(4) An order under this section may be made by any Appellate Court or by the High Court or Court of Session 
when exercising its powers of revision. 
(5) When an order has been made under this section in respect of any offender, the High Court or Court of 
Session may, on appeal when there is a right of appeal to such Court, or when exercising its powers of revision, set 
aside such order, and in lieu thereof pass sentence on such offender according to law: 
Provided that the High Court or Court of Session shall not under this sub-section inflict a greater punishment 
than might have been inflicted by the Court by which the offender was convicted. 
(6) The provisions of sections 121, 124 and 373 shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of sureties offered in 
pursuance of the provisions of this section. 
(7) The Court, before directing the release of an offender under sub-section (1), shall be satisfied that an 
offender or his surety (if any) has a fixed place of abode or regular occupation in the place for which the Court acts 
or in which the offender is likely to live during the period named for the observance of the conditions. 
 (8) If the Court which convicted the offender, or a Court which could have dealt with the offender in respect of 
his original offence, is satisfied that the offender has failed to observe any of the conditions of his recognizance, it 
may issue a warrant for his apprehension. 
(9) An offender, when apprehended on any such warrant, shall be brought forthwith before the Court issuing the 
warrant, and such Court may either remand him in custody until the case is heard or admit him to bail with a 
sufficient surety conditioned on his appearing for sentence and such Court may, after hearing the case, pass 
sentence. 
(10) Nothing in this section shall affect the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), or 
the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960) or any other law for the time being in force for the treatment, training or 
rehabilitation of youthful offenders.  

161 
 
361. Special reasons to be recorded in certain cases.—Where in any case the Court could have dealt with,— 
(a) an accused person under section 360 or under the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 
(20 of 1958); or 
 (b) a youthful offender under the Children Act, 1960 (60 of 1960) or any other law for the time being in 
force for the treatment, training or rehabilitation of youthful offenders,  
but has not done so, it shall record in its judgment the special reasons for not having done so. 
362. Court not to alter judgment.—Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by any other law for the time 
being in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case, shall alter or review the 
same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical error. 
363. Copy of judgment to be given to the accused and other persons.—(1) When the accused is sentenced to 
imprisonment, a copy of the judgment shall, immediately after the pronouncement of the judgment, be given to him 
free of cost. 
(2) On the application of the accused, a certified copy of the judgment, or when he so desires, a translation in 
his own language if practicable or in the language of the Court, shall be given to him without delay, and such copy 
shall, in every case where the judgment is appealable by the accused, be given free of cost: 
Provided that where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, a certified copy of the 
judgment shall be immediately given to the accused free of cost whether or not he applies for the same. 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall apply in relation to an order under section 117 as they apply in 
relation to a judgment which is appealable by the accused. 
(4) When the accused is sentenced to death by any Court and an appeal lies from such judgment as of right, the 
Court shall inform him of the period within which, if he wishes to appeal, his appeal should be preferred. 
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person affected by a judgment or order passed by a 
Criminal Court shall, on an application made in this behalf and on payment of the prescribed charges, be given a 
copy of such judgment or order or of any deposition or other part of the record: 
Provided that the Court may, if it thinks fit for some special reason, give it to him free of cost. 
(6) The High Court may, by rules, provide for the grant of copies of any judgment or order of a Criminal Court 
to any person who is not affected by a judgment or order, on payment, by such person, of such fees, and subject to 
such conditions, as the High Court may, by such rules, provide. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Karnataka 
 
Amendment of section 363.- In section 363 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act of 
1974), after the proviso to sub-section (5), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 
 
“Provided further that the State shall, on an application made in this behalf by the Prosecuting Officer 
be given, free of cost, a certified copy of such judgement, order, deposition or record with the prescribed 
endorsement”. 
 
[Vide Karnataka Act 19 of 1985, s. 2.] 
364. Judgment when to be translated.—The original judgment shall be filed with the record of the 
proceedings and where the original is recorded in a language different from that of the Court, and the accused so 
requires, a translation thereof into the language of the Court shall be added to such record. 
365. Court of Session to send copy of finding and sentence to District Magistrate.—In cases tried by the Court  

162 
 
of Session or a Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Court or such Magistrate, as the case may be, shall forward a copy of its 
or his finding and sentence (if any) to the District Magistrate within whose local jurisdiction the trial was held. 
CHAPTER XXVIII 
SUBMISSION OF DEATH SENTENCES FOR CONFIRMATION 
366. Sentence of death to be submitted by Court of Session for confirmation.—(1) When the Court of 
Session passes a sentence of death, the proceedings shall be submitted to the High Court, and the sentence shall not 
be executed unless it is confirmed by the High Court. 
(2) The Court passing the sentence shall commit the convicted person to jail custody under a warrant. 
367. Power to direct further inquiry to be made or additional evidence to be taken.—(1) If, when such 
proceedings are submitted, the High Court thinks that a further inquiry should be made into, or additional evidence 
taken upon, any point bearing upon the guilt or innocence of the convicted person, it may make such inquiry or take 
such evidence itself, or direct it to be made or taken by the Court of Session. 
 (2) Unless the High Court otherwise directs, the presence of the convicted person may be dispensed with when 
such inquiry is made or such evidence is taken. 
(3) When the inquiry or evidence (if any) is not made or taken by the High Court, the result of such inquiry or 
evidence shall be certified to such Court. 
368. Power of High Court to confirm sentence or annul conviction.—In any case submitted under                   
section 366, the High Court— 
(a) may confirm the sentence, or pass any other sentence warranted by law, or 
(b) may annul the conviction, and convict the accused of any offence of which the Court of Session might 
have convicted him, or order a new trial on the same or an amended charge, or 
(c) may acquit the accused person: 
Provided that no order of confirmation shall be made under this section until the period allowed for preferring an 
appeal has expired, or, if an appeal is presented within such period, until such appeal is disposed of. 
369. Confirmation or new sentence to be signed by two Judges.—In every case so submitted, the 
confirmation of the sentence, or any new sentence or order passed by the High Court, shall, when such Court 
consists of two or more Judges, be made, passed and signed by at least two of them. 
370. Procedure in case of difference of opinion.—Where any such case is heard before a Bench of Judges and 
such Judges are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be decided in the manner provided by section 392. 
371. Procedure in cases submitted to High Court for confirmation.—In cases submitted by the Court of 
Session to the High Court for the confirmation of a sentence of death, the proper officer of the High Court shall, 
without delay, after the order of confirmation or other order has been made by the High Court, send a copy of the 
order, under the seal of the High Court and attested with his official signature, to the Court of Session. 
CHAPTER XXIX 
APPEALS 
372. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided.—No appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a 
Criminal Court except as provided for by this Code by any other law for the time being in force: 

163 
 
1[Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against any order passed by the Court acquitting 
the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the 
Court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of conviction of such Court.] 
373. Appeal from orders requiring security or refusal to accept or rejecting surety for keeping peace or 
good behaviour.—Any person,— 
(i) who has been ordered under section 117 to give security for keeping the peace or for good behaviour, or 
(ii) who is aggrieved by any order refusing to accept or rejecting a surety under section 121, 
may appeal against such order to the Court of Session:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to persons the proceedings against whom are laid before a 
Sessions Judge in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of section 122. 
374. Appeals from convictions.—(1) Any person convicted on a trial held by a High Court in its extraordinary 
original criminal jurisdiction may appeal to the Supreme Court. 
 (2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge or on a trial held 
by any other court in which a sentence of imprisonment for more  than seven years 2[has been passed against him or 
against any other person convicted at the same trial], may appeal to the High Court. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), any person,— 
(a) convicted on a trial held by a Metropolitan Magistrate or Assistant Sessions Judge or Magistrate of the 
first class, or of the second class, or 
(b) sentenced under section 325, or 
(c) in respect of whom an order has been made or a sentence has been passed under section 360 by any 
Magistrate,   
may appeal to the Court of Session. 
3[(4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 376, section 376A, section 376AB, 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860), the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of filing of such appeal.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Assam 
In Section 374 of the Code, in clause (a) of sub-section (3), for the words “Magistrate of the first 
class, or of the second class,” the words “Magistrate of the first class, Executive Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the second class,” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 3(3) and the Schedule.] 
375. No appeal in certain cases when accused pleads guilty.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 
374, where an accused person has pleaded guilty and has been convicted on such plea, there shall be no appeal,— 
(a) if the conviction is by a High Court; or 
(b) if the conviction is by a Court of Session, Metropolitan Magistrate or Magistrate of the first or second 
class, except as to the extent or legality of the sentence. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 29 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 28, for “has been passed”  (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
3. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 20 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 

164 
 
376. No appeal in petty cases.—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 374, there shall be no appeal 
by a convicted person in any of the following cases, namely:— 
(a) where a High Court passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or of 
fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, or of both such imprisonment and fine; 
(b) where a Court of Session or a Metropolitan Magistrate passes only a sentence of imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding three months or of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees, or of both such imprisonment 
and fine; 
(c) where a Magistrate of the first class passes only a sentence of fine not exceeding one hundred rupees; or 
(d) where, in a case tried summarily, a Magistrate empowered to act under section 260 passes only a 
sentence of fine not exceeding two hundred rupees: 
Provided that an appeal may be brought against such sentence if any other punishment is combined with it, but 
such sentence shall not be appealable merely on the ground— 
(i) that the person convicted is ordered to furnish security to keep the peace; or 
(ii) that a direction for imprisonment in default of payment of fine is included in the sentence; or 
(iii) that more than one sentence of fine is passed in the case, if the total amount of fine imposed does not 
exceed the amount hereinbefore specified in respect of the case. 
377. Appeal by the State Government against sentence.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), 
the State Government may, in any case of conviction on a trial held by any Court other than a High Court, direct the 
Public Prosecutor to present 1[an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy— 
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and 
 (b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court.] 
(2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has been investigated by the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment, constituted under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by any other 
agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than this Code, 2[the Central 
Government may also direct] the Public Prosecutor to present 1[an appeal against the sentence on the ground of its 
inadequacy— 
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by the Magistrate; and 
(b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any other Court]. 
(3) When an appeal has been filed against the sentence on the ground of its inadequacy, 3[the Court of Session 
or, as the case may be, the High Court] shall not enhance the sentence except after giving to the accused a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement and while showing cause, the accused may 
plead for his acquittal or for the reduction of the sentence. 
4[(4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence passed under section 376, section 376A, section 376AB, 
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB or section 376E of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860), the appeal shall be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of filing of such appeal. 
378. Appeal in case of acquittal.—5[(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), and subject to the 
provisions of sub-sections (3) and (5),— 
(a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the Court of 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 31, for certain words (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 29, for certain words (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
3. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “the High Court” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 21 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
5. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 32, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

165 
 
Session from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non-bailable offence; 
(b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High 
Court from an original or appellate order of acquittal passed by any Court other than a High Court [not being an 
order under clause (a)] or an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision.] 
(2) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case in which the offence has been investigated by the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment constituted under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by 
any other agency empowered to make investigation into an offence under any Central Act other than this Code, 1[the 
Central Government may, subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an 
appeal— 
(a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal passed by a Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and 
non-bailable offence; 
 (b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order of an acquittal passed by any Court other than a 
High Court [not being an order under clause (a)] or an order of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in 
revision]. 
(3) 2[No appeal to the High Court] under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be entertained except with the 
leave of the High Court. 
(4) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon complaint and the High Court, on an 
application made to it by the complainant in this behalf, grants special leave to appeal from the order of acquittal, 
the complainant may present such an appeal to the High Court. 
(5) No application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall 
be entertained by the High Court after the expiry of six months, where the complainant is a public servant, and sixty 
days in every other case, computed from the date of that order of acquittal. 
 (6) If, in any case, the application under sub-section (4) for the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of 
acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order of acquittal shall lie under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2). 
379. Appeal against conviction by High Court in certain cases.—Where the High Court has, on appeal, 
reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person and convicted him and sentenced him to death or to 
imprisonment for life or to imprisonment for a term of ten years or more, he may appeal to the Supreme Court. 
380. Special right of appeal in certain cases.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, when 
more persons than one are convicted in one trial, and an appealable judgment or order has been passed in respect of 
any of such persons, all or any of the persons convicted at such trial shall have a right of appeal. 
381. Appeal to Court of Session how heard.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), an appeal to the 
Court of Session or Sessions Judge shall be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional Sessions Judge: 
Provided that an appeal against a conviction on a trial held by a Magistrate of the second class may be heard 
and disposed of by an Assistant Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate. 
(2) An Additional Sessions Judge, Assistant Sessions Judge or a Chief Judicial Magistrate shall hear only such 
appeals as the Sessions Judge of the division may, by general or special order, make over to him or as the High 
Court may, by special order, direct him to hear. 
 
 
382. Petition of appeal.—Every appeal shall be made in the form of a petition in writing presented by the 
appellant or his pleader, and every such petition shall (unless the Court to which it is presented otherwise directs) be 
accompanied by a copy of the judgment or order appealed against. 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 32, for certain words (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for “No appeal” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

166 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep 
Section 382 shall be re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section, and sub-section (1) as so                    
re-numbered, the following provisos and Explanation shall be added, namely: — 
“Provided that where it is not practicable to file the petition of appeal to the proper Appellate Court, 
the petition of appeal may be presented to the Administrator or to an Executive Magistrate, not below the 
rank of Sub-Divisional Magistrate, who shall forward the same to the proper Appellate Court; and, when 
any such appeal is presented to the Administrator or to an Executive Magistrate, he shall record thereon 
the date of its  date of presentation and, if he is satisfied that, by reason of the weather, transport or other 
difficulties, it is not possible for the appellant to obtain, from the proper Appellate Court, orders for the 
suspension of sentence or for bail, he may, in respect of such appeal, or an appeal forwarded to him under 
section 383, exercise all or any of the powers of the proper Appellate Court and sub-section (1) of section 
389 with regard to suspension of sentence or release of a convicted person on bail: 
Provided further that the order so made by Administrator or the Executive Magistrate shall have 
effect until it is reversed or modified by the proper Appellate Court. 
Explanation:—For the purposes of the provisos to this section, and section 383, ‘Administrator’, in 
relation to a Union territory means the Administrator appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
Constitution, for that Union territory.”; 
In section 382 after sub-section (1) as so re-numbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 
“(2) For purposes of computation of the period of limitation, and for all other purposes, an appeal 
presented to an Administrator or an Executive Magistrate under sub-section (1) or as the case may be, 
under section 383, shall be deemed to be an appeal presented to the proper Appellate Court.”; 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974) s. 5.] 
383. Procedure when appellant in jail.—If the appellant is in jail, he may present his petition of appeal and 
the copies accompanying the same to the officer in charge of the jail, who shall thereupon forward such petition and 
copies to the proper Appellate Court. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep 
In section 383, the following words shall be inserted at the end, namely: — 
“or if, by reason of the weather, transport or other difficulties, it is not possible to forward them to the 
proper Appellate Court they shall be forwarded to the Administrator or an Executive Magistrate, not 
below the rank of a Sub-Divisional Magistrate, who shall, on receipt of such petition of appeal and copies, 
record thereon the date of receipt thereof and thereafter forward the same to the proper Appellate Court.”. 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974), s. 5.] 
384. Summary dismissal of appeal.—(1) If upon examining the petition of appeal and copy of the judgment 
received under section 382 or section 383, the Appellate Court considers that there is no sufficient ground for 
interfering, it may dismiss the appeal summarily: 
Provided that— 

167 
 
(a) no appeal presented under section 382 shall be dismissed unless the appellant or his pleader has had a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in support of the same; 
(b) no appeal presented under section 383 shall be dismissed except after giving the appellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard in support of the same, unless the Appellate Court considers that the appeal is 
frivolous or that the production of the accused in custody before the Court would involve such inconvenience as 
would be disproportionate in the circumstances of the case; 
 (c) no appeal presented under section 383 shall be dismissed summarily until the period allowed for 
preferring such appeal has expired. 
(2) Before dismissing an appeal under this section, the Court may call for the record of the case. 
(3) Where the Appellate Court dismissing an appeal under this section is a Court of Session or of the Chief 
Judicial Magistrate, it shall record its reasons for doing so.  
(4) Where an appeal presented under section 383 has been dismissed summarily under this section and the 
Appellate Court finds that another petition of appeal duly presented under section 382 on behalf of the same 
appellant has not been considered by it, that Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in section 393, if 
satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of justice so to do, hear and dispose of such appeal in accordance with 
law. 
385. Procedure for hearing appeals not dismissed summarily.—(1) If the Appellate Court does not dismiss 
the appeal summarily, it shall cause notice of the time and place at which such appeal will be heard to be given— 
(i) to the appellant or his pleader;  
(ii) to such officer as the State Government may appoint in this behalf; 
(iii) if the appeal is from a judgment of conviction in a case instituted upon complaint, to the complainant; 
(iv) if the appeal is under section 377 or section 378, to the accused, and shall also furnish such officer, 
complainant and accused with a copy of the grounds of appeal. 
(2) The Appellate Court shall then send for the record of the case, if such record is not already available in that 
Court, and hear the parties: 
Provided that if the appeal is only as to the extent or the legality of the sentence, the Court may dispose of the 
appeal without sending for the record. 
(3) Where the only ground for appeal from a conviction is the alleged severity of the sentence, the appellant 
shall not, except with the leave of the Court, urge or be heard in support of any other ground. 
386. Powers of the Appellate Court.—After perusing such record and hearing the appellant or his pleader, if 
he appears, and the Public Prosecutor if he appears, and in case of an appeal under section 377 or section 378, the 
accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering, 
dismiss the appeal, or may— 
(a) in an appeal from an order or acquittal, reverse such order and direct that further inquiry be made, or 
that the accused be re-tried or committed for trial, as the case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on 
him according to law; 
(b) in an appeal from a conviction—  
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused, or order him to be re-tried by a 
Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such Appellate Court or committed for trial, or 
(ii) alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or  

168 
 
(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature and extent, of the 
sentence, but not so as to enhance the same— 
(c) in an appeal for enhancement of sentence— 
(i) reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or discharge the accused or order him to be re-tried by a 
Court competent to try the offence, or 
(ii) alter the finding maintaining the sentence, or 
 (iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature or the extent, or, the nature and extent, of the 
sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the same; 
(d) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse such order; 
(e) make any amendment or any consequential or incidental order that may be just or proper: 
Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced unless the accused has had an opportunity of showing cause 
against such enhancement: 
Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not inflict greater punishment for the offence which in its 
opinion the accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for that offence by the Court passing the order or 
sentence under appeal. 
387. Judgments of Subordinate Appellate Court.—The rules contained in Chapter XXVII as to the judgment 
of a Criminal Court of original jurisdiction shall apply, so far as may be practicable, to the judgment in appeal of a 
Court of Session or Chief Judicial Magistrate: 
Provided that, unless the Appellate Court otherwise directs, the accused shall not be brought up, or required to 
attend, to hear  judgment delivered. 
388. Order of High Court on appeal to be certified to lower Court.—(1) Whenever a case is decided on 
appeal by the High Court under this Chapter, it shall certify its judgment or order to the Court by which the finding, 
sentence or order appealed against was recorded or passed and if such Court is that of a Judicial Magistrate other 
than the Chief Judicial Magistrate, the High Court's judgment or order shall be sent through the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, and if such Court is that of an Executive Magistrate, the High Court’s judgment or order shall be sent 
through the District Magistrate. 
(2) The Court to which the High Court certifies its judgment or order shall thereupon make such orders as are 
conformable to the judgment or order of the High Court; and if necessary, the record shall be amended in 
accordance therewith. 
389. Suspension of sentence pending the appeal; release of appellant on bail.—(1) Pending any appeal by a 
convicted person, the Appellate Court may, for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, order that the execution of the 
sentence or order appealed against be suspended and, also, if he is in confinement, that he be released on bail, or on 
his own bond:  
1[Provided that the Appellate Court shall, before releasing on bail or on his own bond a convicted person who is 
convicted of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten 
years, shall give opportunity to the Public Prosecutor for showing cause in writing against such release: 
Provided further that in cases where a convicted person is released on bail it shall be open to the Public 
Prosecutor to file an application for the cancellation of the bail.] 
(2) The power conferred by this section on a Appellate Court may be exercised also by the High Court in the 
case of an appeal by a convicted person to a Court subordinate thereto. 
(3) Where the convicted person satisfies the Court by which he is convicted that he intends to present an appeal, 
the Court shall,— 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 33 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

169 
 
(i) where such person, being on bail, is sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or 
(ii) where the offence of which such person has been convicted is a bailable one, and he is on bail,  
order that the convicted person be released on bail, unless there are special reasons for refusing bail, for such period as 
will afford sufficient time to present the appeal and obtain the orders of the Appellate Court under sub-section (1); and 
the sentence of imprisonment shall, so long as he is so released on bail, be deemed to be suspended. 
(4) When the appellant is ultimately sentenced to imprisonment for a term or to imprisonment for life, the time 
during which he is so released shall be excluded in computing the term for which he is so sentenced. 
390. Arrest of accused in appeal from acquittal.—When an appeal is presented under section 378, the High 
Court may issue a warrant directing that the accused be arrested and brought before it or any Subordinate Court, and 
the Court before which he is brought may commit him to prison pending the disposal of the appeal or admit him to 
bail. 
391. Appellate Court may take further evidence or direct it to be taken.—(1) In dealing with any appeal 
under this Chapter, the Appellate Court, if it thinks additional evidence to be necessary, shall record its reasons and 
may either take such evidence itself, or direct it to be taken by a Magistrate  or, when the Appellate Court is a High 
Court, by a Court of Session or a Magistrate. 
(2) When the additional evidence is taken by the Court of Session or the Magistrate, it or he shall certify such 
evidence to the Appellate Court, and such Court shall thereupon proceed to dispose of the appeal. 
(3) The accused or his pleader shall have the right to be present when the additional evidence is taken. 
(4) The taking of evidence under this section shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter XXIII, as if it were an 
inquiry. 
392. Procedure where Judges of Court of Appeal are equally divided.—When an appeal under this Chapter 
is heard by a High Court before a Bench of Judges and they are divided in opinion, the appeal, with their opinions, 
shall be laid before another Judge of that Court, and that Judge, after such hearing as he thinks fit, shall deliver his 
opinion, and the judgment or order shall follow that opinion: 
Provided that if one of the Judges constituting the Bench, or, where the appeal is laid before another Judge 
under this section, that Judge, so requires, the appeal shall be re-heard and decided by a larger Bench of Judges. 
393. Finality of judgments and orders on appeal.—Judgments and orders passed by an Appellate Court upon 
an appeal shall be final, except in the cases provided for in section 377, section 378, sub-section (4) of section 384 
or Chapter XXX: 
Provided that notwithstanding the final disposal of an appeal against conviction in any case, the Appellate Court 
may hear and dispose of, on the merits,— 
(a) an appeal against acquittal under section 378, arising out of the same case, or 
(b) an appeal for the enhancement of sentence under section 377, arising out of the same case. 
394. Abatement of appeals.—(1) Every other appeal under section 377 or section 378 shall finally abate on the 
death of the accused. 
(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an appeal from a sentence of fine) shall finally abate on the 
death of the appellant: 
Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction and sentence of death or of imprisonment, and the 
appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may, within thirty days of the death of the 
appellant, apply to the Appellate Court for leave to continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, the appeal shall not 
abate. 
Explanation.—In this section, “near relative” means a parent, spouse, lineal descendant, brother or sister.  

170 
 
CHAPTER XXX 
REFERENCE AND REVISION 
395. Reference to High Court.—(1) Where any Court is satisfied that a case pending before it involves a 
question as to the validity of any Act, Ordinance or Regulation or of any provision contained  in an  Act, Ordinance 
or Regulation, the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the case, and is of opinion that such Act, 
Ordinance, Regulation or provision is invalid or inoperative, but has not been so declared by the High Court to 
which that Court is Subordinate or by the Supreme Court, the Court shall state a case setting out its opinion and the 
reasons therefor, and refer the same for the decision of the High Court. 
Explanation.—In this section, “Regulation” means any Regulation as defined in the General Clauses Act, 1897 
(10 of 1897), or in the General Clauses Act of a State. 
(2) A Court of Session or a Metropolitan Magistrate may, if it or he thinks fit in any case pending before it or 
him to which the provisions of sub-section (1) do not apply, refer for the decision of the High Court any question of 
law arising in the hearing of such case. 
(3) Any Court making a reference to the High Court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) may, pending the 
decision of the High Court thereon, either commit the accused to jail or release him on bail to appear when called 
upon. 
396. Disposal of case according to decision of High Court.—(1) When a question has been so referred, the 
High Court shall pass such order thereon as it thinks fit, and shall cause a copy of such order to be sent to the Court 
by which the reference was made, which shall dispose of the case conformably to the said order. 
(2) The High Court may direct by whom the costs of such reference shall be paid. 
397. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision.—(1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call 
for and examine the record of any proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local 
jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself; to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, 
sentence or order, recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, 
when calling, for such record, direct that the execution of any sentence or order be suspended, and if the accused is 
in confinement that he be released on bail or on his own bond pending the examination of the record. 
Explanation.—All Magistrates, whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising original or appellate 
jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this sub-section and of              
section 398. 
(2) The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be exercised in relation to any interlocutory 
order passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding. 
(3) If an application under this section has been made by any person either to the High Court or to the Sessions 
Judge, no further application by the same person shall be entertained by the other of them. 
398. Power to order inquiry.—On examining any record under section 397 or otherwise, the High Court or the 
Sessions Judge may direct the Chief Judicial Magistrate by himself or by any of the Magistrates subordinate to him 
to make, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate may himself make or direct any subordinate Magistrate to make, further 
inquiry into any complaint which has been dismissed under section 203 or sub-section (4) of section 204, or into the 
case of any person accused of an offence who has been discharged: 
Provided that no Court shall make any direction under this section for inquiry into the case of any person who 
has been discharged unless such person has had an opportunity of showing cause why such direction should not be 
made. 
399. Sessions Judge's powers of revision.—(1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been 
called for by himself, the Sessions Judge may exercise all or any of the powers which may be exercised by the High 

171 
 
Court under sub-section (1) of section 401. 
(2) Where any proceeding by way of revision is commenced before a Sessions Judge under sub-section (1), the 
provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 401 shall, so far as may be, apply to such proceeding and 
references in the said sub-sections to the High Court shall be construed as references to the Sessions Judge. 
(3) Where any application for revision is made by or on behalf of any person before the Sessions Judge, the 
decision of the Sessions Judge thereon in relation to such person shall be final and no further proceeding by way of 
revision at the instance of such person shall be entertained by the High Court or any other Court. 
400. Power of Additional Sessions Judge.—An Additional Sessions Judge shall have and may exercise all the 
powers of a Sessions Judge under this Chapter in respect of any case which may be transferred to him by or under 
any general or special order of the Sessions Judge. 
401. High Court's powers of revision.—(1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called 
for by itself or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion, exercise any of the 
powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by sections 386, 389, 390 and 391 or on a Court of Session by section 307, 
and, when the Judges composing the Court of Revision are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of 
in the manner provided by section 392. 
(2)  No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other person unless he has had 
an opportunity of being heard either personally or by pleader in his own defence. 
 (3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one 
conviction. 
(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal is brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be 
entertained at the instance of the party who could have appealed. 
(5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an application for revision has been made to the High Court by 
any person and the High Court is satisfied that such application was made under the erroneous belief that no appeal 
lies thereto and that it is necessary in the interests of Justice so to do, the High Court may treat the application for 
revision as a petition of appeal and deal with the same accordingly. 
402. Power of High Court to withdraw or transfer revision cases.—(1) Whenever one or more persons 
convicted at the same trial makes or make application to a High Court for revision and any  other person  convicted at 
the same trial makes an  application to the Sessions Judge for revision, the High Court shall decide, having regard to the 
general convenience  of the  parties and the importance of the questions involved, which of the two Courts  should  
finally dispose of the applications for revision and when the High Court decides that all the applications for revision 
should be disposed of by  itself, the High Court shall direct that the applications for revision  pending before the  
Sessions Judge be transferred to itself and where the High Court decides that it is not necessary for it to dispose of the 
applications for revision, it shall direct that the applications for revision made to it be transferred to the Sessions Judge. 
(2) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the High Court, that Court shall deal with the same 
as if it were an application duly made before itself. 
(3) Whenever any application for revision is transferred to the Sessions Judge, that Judge shall deal with the 
same as if it were an application duly made before himself. 
(4) Where an application for revision is transferred by the High Court to the Sessions Judge, no further 
application for revision shall lie to the High Court or to any other Court at the instance of the person or persons 
whose applications for revision have been disposed of by the Sessions Judge. 
403. Option of Court to hear parties.—Save as otherwise expressly provided by this Code, no party has any 
right to be heard either personally or by pleader before any Court exercising its powers of revision; but the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, when exercising such powers, hear any party either personally or by pleader. 

172 
 
404. Statement by Metropolitan Magistrate of grounds of his decision to be considered by High Court.—
When the record of any trial held by a Metropolitan Magistrate is called for by the High Court or Court of Session 
under section 397, the Magistrate may submit with the record a statement setting forth the grounds of his decision or 
order and any facts which he thinks material to the issue, and that Court shall consider such statement before 
overruling or setting aside the said decision or order. 
405. High Court's order to be certified to lower Court.—When a case is revised under this Chapter by the 
High Court or a Sessions Judge, it or he shall, in the manner provided by section 388, certify its decision or order to 
the Court by which the finding, sentence or order revised was recorded or passed, and the Court to which the 
decision or order is so certified shall thereupon  make such orders as are conformable to the decision so certified, 
and, if necessary, the record shall be amended in accordance therewith. 
CHAPTER XXXI 
TRANSFER OF CRIMINAL CASES 
406. Power of Supreme Court to transfer cases and appeals.—(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the 
Supreme Court that an order under this section is expedient for the ends of justice, it may direct that any particular 
case or appeal be transferred from one High Court to another High Court or from a Criminal Court subordinate to 
one High Court to another Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction subordinate to another High Court. 
 (2) The Supreme Court may act under this section only on the application of the Attorney-General of India or 
of a party interested, and every such application shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the applicant is 
the Attorney-General of India or the Advocate-General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation. 
(3) Where any application for the exercise of the powers conferred by this section is dismissed, the Supreme 
Court may, if it is of opinion that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of 
compensation to any person who has opposed the application such sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it may 
consider appropriate in the circumstances of the case. 
407. Power of High Court to transfer cases and appeals.—(1) Whenever it is made to appear to the High 
Court— 
(a) that a fair and impartial inquiry or trial cannot be had in any Criminal Court subordinate thereto, or 
(b) that some question of law of unusual difficulty is likely to arise, or 
(c) that an order under this section is required by any provision of this Code, or will tend to the general 
convenience of the parties or witnesses, or is expedient for the ends of justice, 
it may order— 
(i) that any offence be inquired into or tried by any Court not qualified under sections 177 to 185 (both 
inclusive), but in other respects competent to inquire into or try such offence; 
(ii) that any particular case or appeal, or class of cases or appeals, be transferred from a Criminal Court 
subordinate to its authority to any other such Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction; 
(iii) that any particular case be committed for trial to a Court of Session; or 
(iv) that any particular case or appeal be transferred to and tried before itself. 
(2) The High Court may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the application of a party interested, or 
on its own initiative: 
Provided that no application shall lie to the High Court for transferring a case from one Criminal Court to 

173 
 
another Criminal Court in the same sessions division, unless an application for such transfer has been made to the 
Sessions Judge and rejected by him. 
(3) Every application for an order under sub-section (1) shall be made by motion, which shall, except when the 
applicant is the Advocate-General of the State, be supported by affidavit or affirmation. 
(4) When such application is made by an accused person, the High Court may direct him to execute                    
a bond, with or without sureties, for the payment of any compensation which the High Court may award under              
sub-section (7). 
(5) Every accused person making such application shall give to the Public Prosecutor notice in writing of the 
application, together with a copy of the grounds on which it is made; and no order shall be made on the merits of the 
applications unless at least twenty-four hours have elapsed between the giving of such notice and the hearing of the 
application. 
 (6) Where the application is for the transfer of a case or appeal from any Subordinate Court, the High Court 
may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the interest of Justice, order that, pending the disposal of the 
application the proceedings in the Subordinate Court shall be stayed, on such terms as the High Court may think fit 
to impose: 
Provided that such stay shall not affect the Subordinate Court’s power of remand under section 309. 
 (7) Where an application for an order under sub-section (1) is dismissed, the High Court may, if it is of opinion 
that the application was frivolous or vexatious, order the applicant to pay by way of compensation to any person 
who has opposed the application such sum not exceeding one thousand rupees as it may consider proper in the 
circumstances of the case. 
(8) When the High Court orders under sub-section (1) that a case be transferred from any Court for trial before 
itself, it shall observe in such trial the same procedure which that Court would have observed if the case had not 
been so transferred. 
(9) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect any order of Government under section 197. 
408. Power of Sessions Judge to transfer cases and appeals.—(1) Whenever it is made to appear to a 
Sessions Judge that an order under this sub-section is expedient for the ends of justice, he may order that any 
particular case be transferred from one Criminal Court to another Criminal Court in his sessions division.  
(2) The Sessions Judge may act either on the report of the lower Court, or on the application of a party 
interested, or on his own initiative. 
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and (9) of section 407 shall apply in relation to an 
application to the Sessions Judge for an order under sub-section (1) as they apply in relation to an application to the 
High Court for an order under sub-section (1) of section 407, except that sub-section (7) of that section shall so 
apply as if for the words “one thousand rupees” occurring therein, the words “two hundred and fifty rupees” were 
substituted. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Kerala  
Amendment of section 408. —In section 408 of the principal Act, for the words “any other Magistrate”, the 
words “other Magistrate of the first class”, and for the words “any Magistrate” the words “a Magistrate of the first 
class”, shall be substituted. 
[Vide Kerala Act 5 of 1957, s. 3.] 

174 
 
409. Withdrawal of cases and appeals by Session Judge.—(1) A Sessions Judge may withdraw any case or 
appeal from, or recall any case or appeal which he has made over to, any Assistant Sessions Judge or Chief Judicial 
Magistrate subordinate to him. 
(2) At any time before the trial of the case or the hearing of the appeal has commenced before the Additional 
Sessions Judge, a Sessions Judge may recall any case or appeal which he has made over to any Additional Sessions 
Judge. 
(3) Where a Sessions Judge withdraws or recalls case or appeal under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), he may 
either try the case in his own Court or hear the appeal himself, or make it over in accordance with the provisions of 
this Code to another Court for trial or hearing, as the case may be. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Kerala  
Substitution of new section for section 409. —For section 409 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be substituted, namely:— 
409. Appeals to Court of Section how heard.—An appeal to the Court of Session or Sessions Judge shall 
be heard by the Sessions Judge or by an Additional Sessions Judge: 
Provided that an Additional Sessions Judge shall hear only such appeals as the State Government may, by 
general or special order, direct or as the Sessions Judge of the division may make over to him. 
[Vide Kerala Act 5 of 1957, s. 4.] 
410. Withdrawal of cases by Judicial Magistrate.—(1) Any Chief Judicial Magistrate may withdraw any case 
from, or recall any case which he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to him, and may inquire into or try 
such case himself, or refer it for inquiry or trial to any other such Magistrate competent to inquire into or try the 
same. 
(2) Any Judicial Magistrate may recall any case made over by him under sub-section (2) of section 192 to any 
other Magistrate and may inquire into or try such cases himself. 
411. Making over or withdrawal of cases by Executive Magistrates.—Any District Magistrate or                   
Sub- Divisional Magistrate may— 
(a) make over, for disposal, any proceeding which has been started before him, to any Magistrate 
subordinate to him; 
(b) withdraw any case from, or recall any case which he has made over to, any Magistrate subordinate to 
him, and dispose of such proceeding himself  or refer it for disposal to any other Magistrate. 
412. Reasons to be recorded.—A Sessions Judge or Magistrate making an order under section 408, section 
409, section 410 or section 411 shall record his reasons for making it. 
CHAPTER XXXII 
EXECUTION, SUSPENSION, REMISSION AND COMMUTATION OF SENTENCES 
A.—Death Sentences 
413. Execution of order passed under section 368.—When in a case submitted to the High Court for the 
confirmation of a sentence of death, the Court of Session receives the order of confirmation or other order of the 
High Court thereon, it shall cause such order to be carried into effect by issuing a warrant or taking such other steps 
as may be necessary. 
414. Execution of sentence of death passed by High Court.—When a sentence of death is passed by the High 

175 
 
Court in appeal or in revision, the Court of Session shall, on receiving the order of the High Court, cause the 
sentence to be carried into effect by issuing a warrant. 
415. Postponement of execution of sentence of death in case of appeal to Supreme Court.—(1) Where a 
person is sentenced to death by the High Court and an appeal from its judgment lies to the Supreme Court under 
sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) of clause (1) of article 134 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the 
execution of the sentence to be postponed until the period allowed for preferring such appeal has expired, or if, an 
appeal is preferred within that period, until such appeal is disposed of. 
(2) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the person sentenced makes an 
application to the High Court for the grant of a certificate under article 132 or under sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of 
article 134 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed until such 
application is disposed of by the High Court, or if a certificate is granted on such application, until the period 
allowed for preferring an appeal to the Supreme Court on such certificate has expired. 
(3) Where a sentence of death is passed or confirmed by the High Court, and the High Court is satisfied that the 
person sentenced intends to present a petition to the Supreme Court for the grant of special leave to appeal under 
article 136 of the Constitution, the High Court shall order the execution of the sentence to be postponed for such 
period as it considers sufficient to enable him to present such petition. 
416. Postponement of capital sentence on pregnant woman.—If a woman sentenced to death is found to be 
pregnant, the High Court shall 1[****], commute the sentence to imprisonment for life. 
B.—Imprisonment 
417. Power to appoint place of imprisonment.—(1) Except when otherwise provided by any law for the time 
being in force, the State Government may direct in what place any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to 
custody under this Code shall be confined. 
(2) If any person liable to be imprisoned or committed to custody under this Code is in confinement in a civil 
jail, the Court or Magistrate ordering the imprisonment or committal may direct that the person be removed to a 
criminal jail. 
 (3) When a person is removed to a criminal jail under sub-section (2), he shall, on being released therefrom, be 
sent back to the civil jail, unless either— 
(a) three years have elapsed since he was removed to the criminal jail, in which case he shall be deemed to 
have been released from the civil jail under section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or 
section 23 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), as the case may be; or 
(b) the Court which ordered his imprisonment in the civil jail has certified to the officer in charge of the 
criminal jail that he is entitled to be released under section 58 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
or under section 23 of the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), as the case may be.  
418. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.—(1) Where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment for life or 
to imprisonment for a term in cases other than those provided for by section 413, the Court passing the sentence 
shall forthwith forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which he is, or is to be, confined, and, unless the 
accused is already confined in such jail or other place, shall forward him to such jail or other place, with the warrant: 
Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment till the rising of the Court, it shall not be 
necessary to prepare or forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may be confined in such place as the Court may 
direct. 
(2) Where the accused is not present in Court when he is sentenced to such imprisonment as is mentioned in 
sub-section (1), the Court shall issue a warrant for his arrest for the purpose of forwarding him to the jail or other 
                                                 
1. Certain words omitted by Act 5 of 2009, s. 30 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009). 

176 
 
place in which he is to be confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence on the date of his arrest. 
419. Direction of warrant for execution.—Every warrant for the execution of a sentence of imprisonment 
shall be directed to the officer in charge of the jail or other place in which the prisoner is, or is to be, confined. 
420. Warrant with whom to be lodged.—When the prisoner is to be confined in a jail, the warrant shall be 
lodged with the jailor. 
C.—Levy of fine 
421. Warrant for levy of fine.—(1) When an offender has been sentenced to pay a fine, the Court passing the 
sentence may take action for the recovery of the fine in either or both of the following ways, that is to say, it may— 
(a) issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by attachment and sale of any movable property belonging to 
the offender; 
(b) issue a warrant to the Collector of the district, authorising him to realise the amount as arrears of land 
revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both, of the defaulter: 
Provided that, if the sentence directs that in default of payment of the fine, the offender shall be imprisoned, and 
if such offender has undergone the whole of such imprisonment in default, no Court shall issue such warrant unless, 
for special reasons to be recorded in writing, it considers it necessary so to do, or unless  it has made an order for the 
payment of expenses or compensation out of the fine under section 357. 
(2) The State Government may make rules regulating the manner in which warrants under clause (a) of                      
sub-section (1) are to be executed, and for the summary determination of any claims made by any person other than 
the offender in respect of any property attached in execution of such warrant. 
(3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the Collector under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the Collector shall 
realise the amount in accordance with the law relating to recovery of arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant were 
a certificate issued under such law: 
Provided that no such warrant shall be executed by the arrest or detention in prison of the offender. 
422. Effect of such warrant.—A warrant issued under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 421 by any Court 
may be executed within the local jurisdiction of such Court, and it shall authorise the attachment and sale of any 
such property outside such jurisdiction, when it is endorsed by the District Magistrate within whose local 
jurisdiction such property is found. 
423. Warrant for levy of fine issued by a Court in any territory to which this Code does not extend.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or in any other law for the time being in force, when an offender 
has been sentenced to pay a fine by a Criminal Court in any territory to which this Code does not extend and the 
Court passing the sentence issues a warrant to the Collector of a district in the territories to which this Code extends, 
authorising him to realise the amount as if it were an arrear of land revenue, such warrant shall be deemed to be a 
warrant issued under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 421 by a Court in the territories to which this Code 
extends, and the provisions of sub-section (3) of the said section as to the execution of such warrant shall apply 
accordingly. 
424. Suspension of execution of sentence of imprisonment.—(1) When an offender has been sentenced to 
fine only and to imprisonment in default of payment of the fine, and the fine is not paid forthwith, the Court may— 
(a) order that the fine shall be payable either in full on or before a date not more than thirty days from the 
date of the order, or in two or three instalments, of which the first shall be payable on or before a date not more 
than thirty days from the date of the order and the other or others at an interval or at intervals, as the case may 
be, of not more than thirty days; 
(b) suspend the execution of the sentence of imprisonment and release the offender, on the execution by the 
offender of a bond, with or without sureties, as the Court thinks fit, conditioned for his appearance before the 
Court on the date or dates on or before which payment of the fine or the instalments thereof, as the case may be, 

177 
 
is to be made; and if the amount of the fine or of any instalment, as the case may be, is not realised on or before 
the latest date on which it is payable under the order, the Court may direct the sentence of imprisonment to be 
carried into execution at once. 
(2) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall be applicable also in any case in which an order for the payment of 
money has been made on non-recovery of which imprisonment may be awarded and the money is not paid 
forthwith; and, if the person against whom the order has been made, on being required to enter into a bond such as is 
referred to in that sub-section, fails to do so, the Court may at once pass sentence of imprisonment. 
D.—General provisions regarding execution 
425. Who may issue warrant.—Every warrant for the execution of a sentence may be issued either by the 
Judge or Magistrate who passed the sentence, or by his successor-in-office. 
426. Sentence on escaped convict when to take effect.—(1) When a sentence of death, imprisonment for life 
or fine is passed under this Code on an escaped convict, such sentence shall, subject to the provisions hereinbefore 
contained, take effect immediately. 
(2) When a sentence of imprisonment for a term is passed under this Code on an escaped convict,— 
(a) if such sentence is severer in kind than the sentence which such convict was undergoing when he 
escaped, the new sentence shall take effect immediately; 
(b) if such sentence is not severer in kind than the sentence which such convict was undergoing when he 
escaped, the new sentence shall take effect after he has suffered imprisonment for a further period equal to that 
which, at the time of his escape, remained unexpired of his former sentence. 
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a sentence of rigorous imprisonment shall be deemed to be severer in 
kind than a sentence of simple imprisonment. 
427. Sentence on offender already sentenced for another offence.—(1) When a person already undergoing a 
sentence of imprisonment is sentenced on a subsequent conviction to imprisonment or imprisonment for life, such 
imprisonment or imprisonment for life shall commence at the expiration of the imprisonment to which he has been 
previously sentenced, unless the Court directs that the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with such previous 
sentence: 
Provided that where a person who has been sentenced to imprisonment by an order under section 122 in default 
of furnishing security is, whilst undergoing such sentence, sentenced to imprisonment for an offence committed 
prior to the making of such order, the latter sentence shall commence immediately. 
(2) When a person already undergoing a sentence of imprisonment for life is sentenced on a subsequent 
conviction to imprisonment for a term or imprisonment for life, the subsequent sentence shall run concurrently with 
such previous sentence. 
428. Period of detention undergone by the accused to be set off against the sentence of imprisonment.— 
Where an accused person has, on conviction, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term, 1[, not being imprisonment 
in default of payment of fine], the period of detention, if any, undergone by him during the  investigation, inquiry or 
trial of the same case and before the date of such conviction, shall be set off against the term of imprisonment 
imposed on him on such conviction, and the liability of such person to undergo imprisonment on such conviction 
shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term of imprisonment imposed on him: 
2[Provided that in cases referred to in section 433A, such period of detention shall be set off against the period 
of fourteen years referred to in that section.] 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 31  (w.e.f.18-12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 34 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

178 
 
429. Saving.—(1) Nothing in section 426 or section 427 shall be held to excuse any person from any part of the 
punishment to which he is liable upon his former or subsequent conviction. 
(2) When an award of imprisonment in default of payment of a fine is annexed to a substantive sentence of 
imprisonment and the person undergoing the sentence is after its execution to undergo a further substantive sentence 
or further substantive sentences of imprisonment, effect shall not be given to the award of imprisonment in default 
of payment of the fine until the person has undergone the further sentence or sentences. 
430. Return of warrant on execution of sentence.—When a sentence has been fully executed, the officer 
executing it shall return the warrant to the Court from which it is issued, with an endorsement under his hand 
certifying the manner in which the sentence has been executed. 
431. Money ordered to be paid recoverable as a fine.—Any money (other than a fine) payable by virtue of 
any order made under this Code, and the method of recovery of which is not otherwise expressly provided for, shall 
be recoverable as if it were a fine: 
Provided that section 421 shall, in its application to an order under section 359, by virtue of this section, be 
construed as if in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 421, after the words and figures “under section 357”, the 
words and figures “or an order for payment of costs under section 359” had been inserted. 
E.—Suspension, remission and commutation of sentences 
432. Power to suspend or remit sentences.—(1) When any person has been sentenced to punishment for an 
offence, the appropriate Government may, at any time, without conditions or upon any conditions which the person 
sentenced accepts, suspend the execution of his sentence or remit the whole or any part of the punishment to which 
he has been sentenced. 
(2) Whenever an application is made to the appropriate Government for the suspension or remission of a 
sentence, the appropriate Government may require the presiding Judge of the Court before or by which the 
conviction was had or confirmed, to state his opinion as to whether the application should be granted or refused, 
together with his reasons for such opinion and also to forward with the statement of such opinion a certified copy of 
the record of the trial or of such record thereof as exists. 
(3) If any condition on which a sentence has been suspended or remitted is, in the opinion of the appropriate 
Government, not fulfilled, the appropriate Government may cancel the suspension or remission, and thereupon the 
person in whose favour the sentence has been suspended or remitted may, if at large, be arrested by any police 
officer, without warrant and remanded to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence. 
(4) The condition on which a sentence is suspended or remitted under this section may be one to be fulfilled by 
the person in whose favour the sentence is suspended or remitted, or one independent of his will. 
(5) The appropriate Government may, by general rules or special orders, give directions as to the suspension of 
sentences and the conditions on which petitions should be presented and dealt with: 
Provided that in the case of any sentence (other than a sentence of fine) passed on a male person above the age 
of eighteen years, no such petition by the person sentenced or by any other person on his behalf shall be entertained, 
unless the person sentenced is in jail, and— 
(a) where such petition is made by the person sentenced, it is presented through the officer in charge of the 
jail; or 
(b) where such petition is made by any other person, it contains a declaration that the person sentenced is in 
jail. 
(6) The provisions of the above sub-sections shall also apply to any order passed by a Criminal Court under any 
section of this Code or of any other law, which restricts the liberty of any person or imposes any liability upon him 
or his property. 

179 
 
(7) In this section and in section 433, the expression “appropriate Government” means,— 
(a) in cases where the sentence is for an offence against, or the order referred to in sub-section (6) is passed 
under, any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; 
(b) in other cases, the Government of the State within which the offender is sentenced or the said order is 
passed. 
433. Power to commute sentence.—The appropriate Government may, without the consent of the person 
sentenced, commute— 
(a) a sentence of death, for any other punishment provided by the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(b) a sentence of imprisonment for life, for imprisonment for a term not exceeding fourteen years or for 
fine; 
(c) a sentence of rigorous imprisonment, for simple imprisonment for any term to which that person might 
have been sentenced, or for fine; 
(d) a sentence of simple imprisonment, for fine. 
1[433A. Restriction on powers of remission or commutation in certain cases.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 432, where a sentence of imprisonment for life is imposed on conviction of a person for an 
offence for which death is one of the punishments provided by law, or where a sentence of death imposed on a 
person has been commuted under section 433 into one of imprisonment for life, such person shall not be released 
from prison unless he had served at least fourteen years of imprisonment.] 
434. Concurrent power of Central Government in case of death sentences.—The powers conferred by 
sections 432 and 433 upon the State Government may, in the case of sentences of death, also be exercised by the 
Central Government. 
435. State Government to act after consultation with Central Government in certain cases.—(1) The 
powers conferred by sections 432 and 433 upon the State Government to remit or commute a sentence, in any case 
where the sentence is for an offence— 
(a) which was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment constituted under the Delhi Special 
Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946), or by any other agency empowered to make investigation into an 
offence under any Central Act other than this Code, or 
(b) which involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property belonging to the 
Central Government, or 
(c) which was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while acting or purporting 
to act in the discharge of his official duty, 
shall not be exercised by the State Government except after consultation with the Central Government. 
(2) No order of suspension, remission or commutation of sentences passed by the State Government in relation 
to a person, who has been convicted of offences, some of which relate to matters to which the executive power of 
the Union extends, and who has been sentenced to separate terms of imprisonment which are to run concurrently, 
shall have effect unless an order for the suspension, remission or commutation, as the case may be, of such 
sentences has also been made by the Central Government in relation to the offences committed by such person with 
regard to matters to which the executive power of the Union extends. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 32   (w.e.f.18-12-1978).  

180 
 
CHAPTER XXXIII 
PROVISIONS AS TO BAIL AND BONDS 
436. In what cases bail to be taken.—(1) When any person other than a person accused of a non-bailable 
offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station, or appears or is brought 
before a Court, and is prepared at any time while in the custody of such officer or at any stage of the proceeding 
before such Court to give bail, such person shall be released on bail: 
Provided that such officer or Court, if he or it thinks fit, 1[may, and shall, if such person is indigent and is 
unable to furnish surety, instead of taking bail] from such person, discharge him on his executing a bond without 
sureties for his appearance as hereinafter provided. 
2[Explanation.—Where a person is unable to give bail within a week of the date of his arrest, it shall be a 
sufficient ground for the officer or the Court to presume that he is an indigent person for the purposes of this 
proviso:] 
Provided further that nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of sub-section (3) of 
section 116 3[or section 446A]. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where a person has failed to comply with the 
conditions of the bail-bond as regards the time and place of attendance, the Court may refuse to release him on bail, 
when on a subsequent occasion in the same case he appears before the Court or is brought in custody and any such 
refusal shall be without prejudice to the powers of the Court to call upon any person bound by such bond to pay the 
penalty thereof under section 446. 
4[436A. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained.—Where a person has, during 
the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under this Code of an offence under any law (not being an offence for 
which the punishment of death has been specified as one of the punishments under that law) undergone detention for 
a period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offence under that law, 
he shall be released by the Court on his personal bond with or without sureties: 
Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, 
order the continued detention of such person for a period longer than one-half of the said period or release him on 
bail instead of the personal bond with or without sureties: 
Provided further that no such person shall in any case be detained during the period of investigation, inquiry or 
trial for more than the maximum period of imprisonment provided for the said offence under that law. 
Explanation.—In computing the period of detention under this section for granting bail, the period of detention 
passed due to delay in proceeding caused by the accused shall be excluded.] 
437. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence.—5[(1) When any person accused of, or 
suspected of, the commission of any non-bailable offence is arrested or detained without warrant by an officer in 
charge of a police station or appears or is brought before a Court other than the High Court or Court of session, he 
may be released on bail, but— 
(i) such person shall not be so released if there appear reasonable grounds for believing that he has been 
guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life; 
(ii) such person shall not be so released if such offence is a cognizable offence and he had been previously 
convicted of an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for life or imprisonment for seven years or more, 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 35, for certain words (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 35, (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
3. Ins. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 4 (w.e.f. 23-9-1980).  
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 36 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
5. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 5, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 23-9-1980).  

181 
 
or he had been previously convicted on two or more occasions of 1[a cognizable offence punishable with 
imprisonment for three years or more but not less than seven years:] 
Provided that the Court may direct that a person referred to in clause (i) or clause (ii) be released on bail if such 
person is under the age of sixteen years or is a woman or is sick or infirm: 
Provided further that the Court may also direct that a person referred to in clause (ii) be released on bail if it is 
satisfied that it is just and proper so to do for any other special reason: 
Provided also that the mere fact that an accused person may be required for being identified by witnesses during 
investigation shall not be sufficient ground for refusing to grant bail if he is otherwise entitled to be released on bail 
and gives an undertaking that he shall comply with such directions as may be given by the Court:] 
2[Provided also that no person shall, if the offence alleged to have been committed by him is punishable with 
death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for seven years or more, be released on bail by the Court under this 
sub-section without giving an opportunity of hearing to the Public Prosecutor.] 
(2) If it appears to such officer or Court at any stage of the investigation, inquiry or trial, as the case may be, 
that there are not reasonable grounds for believing that the accused has committed a non-bailable offence, but that 
there are sufficient grounds for further inquiry into his guilt, 3[the accused shall, subject to the provisions of section 
446A and pending such inquiry, be released on bail], or, at the discretion of such officer or Court, on the execution 
by him of a bond without sureties for his appearance as hereinafter provided. 
(3) When a person accused or suspected of the commission of an offence punishable with imprisonment which 
may extend to seven years or more or of an offence under Chapter VI, Chapter XVI or Chapter XVII of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) or abatement of, or conspiracy or attempt to commit, any such offence, is released on bail 
under sub-section (1), 4[the Court shall impose the conditions,— 
(a) that such person shall attend in accordance with the conditions of the bond executed under this Chapter, 
(b) that such person shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is accused, or suspected, 
of the commission of which he is suspected, and 
(c) that such person shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or promise to any person 
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any 
police officer or tamper with the evidence, 
and may also impose, in the interests of justice, such other conditions as it considers necessary.] 
(4) An officer or a Court releasing any person on bail under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), shall record in 
writing his or its 5[reasons or special reasons] for so doing. 
(5) Any Court which has released a person on bail under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), may, if it considers 
it necessary so to do, direct that such person be arrested and commit him to custody. 
(6) If, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a person accused of any non-bailable offence is not 
concluded within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed for taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if 
he is in custody during the whole of the said period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise directs. 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 37, for “a non-bailable and cognizable offence” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 37 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
3. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 5, for certain words (w.e.f. 23-9-1980).  
4.  Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 37, for certain words (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  
5. Subs. by Act  63 of 1980, s. 5,  for “reasons”  (w.e.f. 23-9-1980).  

182 
 
(7) If, at any time, after the conclusion of the trial of a person accused of a non-bailable offence and before 
judgment is delivered, the Court is of opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not 
guilty of any such offence, it shall release the accused, if he is in custody, on the execution by him of a bond without 
sureties for his appearance to hear judgment delivered.  
1[437A. Bail to require accused to appear before next appellate Court.—(1) Before conclusion of the trial 
and before disposal of the appeal, the Court trying the offence or the Appellate Court, as the case may be, shall  
require the accused to execute bail bonds with sureties, to appear before the higher Court as and when such Court 
issues notice in respect of any appeal or petition filed against the judgment of the respective Court and such bail 
bonds shall be in force for six months. 
(2) If such accused fails to appear, the bond stand forfeited and the procedure under section 446 shall apply.]  
438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.—(1) When any person has reason to believe 
that he may be arrested on an accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High 
Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section; and that Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that in the 
event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail. 
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under sub-section (1), it may include such 
conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may think fit, including— 
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer as and when 
required; 
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or promise to 
any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or 
to any police officer; 
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court; 
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3) of section 437, as if the bail were 
granted under that section.  
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer in charge of a police station on such 
accusation, and is prepared either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of such officer to give bail, 
he shall be released on bail; and if a Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant should be 
issued in the first instance against that person, he shall issue a bailable warrant in confirmity with the direction of the 
Court under sub-section (1). 
2[(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person on accusation of having 
committed an offence under sub-section (3) of section 376 or section 376AB or section 376DA or section 376DB of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
West Bengal.— 
To sub-section (1) of section 438 of the principal Act, the following proviso shall be added:— 
“Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 31 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009)  
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 22 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 

183 
 
life or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years, no final order shall be made on such application without 
giving the State not less than seven days’ notice to present its case. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 47 of 1981, s. 3.] 
West Bengal.— 
For sub-section (1) of section 438, of the principal Act the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(1) (a) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of having committed a 
non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction under this section that 
in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail: 
Provided that the mere fact that a person has applied to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction 
under this section shall not, in the absence of any order by that Court, be a bar to the apprehension of such person, or 
the detention of such person in custody, by an officer-in-charge of a police station. 
(b) The High Court or the Court of Session, as the case may be, shall dispose of an application for a direction 
under this sub-section within thirty days of the date of such application: 
Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for 
life or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years, no final order shall be made on such application without 
giving the State not less than seven days notice to present its case. 
(c) If any person is arrested and detained in custody by an officer-in-charge of a police station before the 
disposal of the application of such person for a direction under this sub-section, the release of such person on bail by 
a Court having jurisdiction, pending such disposal, shall be subject to the provisions of section 437. 
(1A) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
elsewhere in this Act or in any judgment, decree or order of any Court, tribunal or other authority.”. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 25 of 1990, s. 3.] 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Orissa 
Amendment of section 438.—In section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), to 
sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be added, namely:— 
“Provided that where the apprehended accusation relates to an offence punishable with death, 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years, no final order shall be made 
on such application without giving the State notice to present its case.”: 
[Vide Orissa Act 11 of 1988, s. 2] 
439. Special powers of High Court or Court of Session regarding bail.—(1) A High Court or Court of 
Session may direct,— 
(a) that any person accused of an offence and in custody be released on bail, and if the offence is of the 
nature specified in sub-section (3) of  section 437, may impose any condition which it considers necessary for 
the purposes mentioned in that sub-section; 
(b) that any condition imposed by a Magistrate when releasing any person on bail be set aside or modified:  
Provided that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person who is accused of an 
offence which is triable exclusively by the Court of Session or which, though not so triable, is punishable with 

184 
 
imprisonment for life, give notice of the application for bail to the Public Prosecutor unless it is, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, of opinion that it is not practicable to give such notice. 
1[Provided further that the High Court or the Court of Session shall, before granting bail to a person 
who is accused of an offence triable under sub-section (3) of section 376 or section 376AB or section 
376DA or section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), give notice of the application for bail to 
the Public Prosecutor within a period of fifteen days from the date of receipt of the notice of such 
application.] 
1[(1A) The presence of the informant or any person authorised by him shall be obligatory at the time 
of hearing of the application for bail to the person under sub-section (3) of section 376 or section 
376AB or section 376DA or section DB of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] 
(2) A High Court or Court of Session may direct that any person who has been released on bail under this 
Chapter be arrested and commit him to custody. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Assam.— 
439-A. Power to grant bail.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, no person— 
(a) who, being accused or suspected of committing an offence under any of the following Sections, 
namely, —Sections 120B, 121, 121A, 122, 123, 124A, 153A, 302, 303, 304, 307, 326, 333, 363, 364, 
365, 367, 368, 392, 394, 395, 396, 399, 412, 431, 436, 449 and 450 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, 
Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Indian Explosive Substances Act, 1908, and Sections 25,26, 27, 28, 29, 30 
and 31 of the Arms Act, 1959, is arrested or appears or is brought before a court; or 
(b) who, having any reason to believe that he may be arrested on an accusation of committing an 
offence as specified in clause (a), has applied to the High Court or the Court of Sessions for a direction 
for his release on bail in the event of his arrest, shall be released on bail or as the case may be, directed to 
be released on bail, except on one or more of the following grounds, namely: — 
(i) that the Court including the High Court or the Court of Session for reasons to be recorded in 
writing is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that such person is not guilty of any 
offence specified in clause (a); 
(ii) that such person is under the age of sixteen years or a woman or a sick or an infirm person; 
(iii) that the court including the High Court or the Court of Sessions for reasons to be recorded in 
writing is satisfied that there are exceptional and sufficient grounds to release or direct the release of 
the accused on bail.” 
[Vide Assam Act 3 of 1984, s. 5.] 
440. Amount of bond and reduction thereof.—(1) The amount of every bond executed under this Chapter 
shall be fixed with due regard to the circumstances of the case and shall not be excessive. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 22 of 2018,  s. 23 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 

185 
 
(2) The High Court or the Court of Session may direct that the bail required by a police officer or Magistrate be 
reduced. 
441. Bond of accused and sureties.—(1) Before any person is released on bail or released on his own bond, a 
bond for such sum of money as the police officer or Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient shall be executed by 
such person, and, when he is released on bail, by one or more sufficient sureties conditioned that such person shall 
attend at the time and place mentioned in the bond, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the 
police officer or Court, as the case may be. 
(2) Where any condition is imposed for the release of any person on bail, the bond shall also contain that 
condition. 
(3) If the case so requires, the bond shall also bind the person released on bail to appear when called upon at the 
High Court, Court of Session or other Court to answer the charge. 
(4) For the purpose of determining whether the sureties are fit or sufficient, the Court may accept affidavits in 
proof of the facts contained therein relating to the sufficiency or fitness of the sureties, or, if it considers necessary, 
may either hold an enquiry itself or cause an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to the Court, as to such 
sufficiency or fitness. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Andhra Pradesh 
Amendment of Section 441 Central Act 2 of 1974.—In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(hereinafter referred to as the Principal Act) in section 441, in sub-section (1), the following words shall 
be added at the end, namely. — 
“and for imposition of a fine not exceeding the amount prescribed in the surety bond, in case the surety 
fails to produce the accused on the date fixed by the court in grave/serious offences.” 
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 17 of 2019, s. 2] 
1[441A. Declaration by sureties.—Every person standing surety to an accused person for his release on bail, 
shall make a declaration before the Court as to the number of persons to whom he has stood surety including the 
accused, giving therein all the relevant particulars.] 
442. Discharge from custody.—(1) As soon as the bond has been executed, the person for whose appearance it 
has been executed shall be released; and, when he is in jail, the court admitting him to bail shall issue an order of 
release to the officer in charge of the jail, and such officer on receipt of the orders shall release him. 
(2) Nothing in this section, section 436 or section 437, shall be deemed to require the release of any person 
liable to be detained for some matter other than that in respect of which the bond was executed. 
443. Power to order sufficient bail when that first taken is insufficient.—If, through mistake, fraud or 
otherwise, insufficient sureties have been accepted, or if they afterwards become insufficient, the Court may issue a 
warrant of arrest directing that the person released on bail be brought before it and may order him to find sufficient 
sureties, and, on his failing so to do, may commit him to jail. 
444. Discharge of sureties.—(1) All or any sureties for the attendance and appearance of a person released on 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 39 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

186 
 
bail may at any time apply to a Magistrate to discharge the bond, either wholly or so far as relates to the applicants. 
(2) On such application being made, the Magistrate shall issue his warrant of arrest directing that the person so 
released be brought before him. 
(3) On the appearance of such person pursuant to the warrant, or on his voluntary surrender, the Magistrate shall 
direct the bond to be discharged either wholly or so far as relates to the applicants, and shall call upon such person to 
find other sufficient sureties, and, if he fails to do so, may commit him to jail. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
West Bengal  
In section 444 of the Principal Act,—  
 (1) in sub-section (1) after the words “at any time”, the words, “on showing sufficient cause,” shall be 
inserted; 
(2) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted:— 
“(1A) On such application being made, the Magistrate may either hold an inquiry himself, or cause 
an inquiry to be made by a Magistrate subordinate to him, on the correctness of the reason shown, in 
the application to discharge the bond as stated in sub-section (1)”; 
(3) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted:— 
“(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied, on enquiry made under sub-section (1A), that all or any of the 
sureties applying for discharge may be discharged, he shall issue warrant of arrest directing that the 
person so released be brought before him.” 
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 2003, s. 3.]  
445. Deposit instead of recognizance.—When any person is required by any Court or officer to execute a bond 
with or without sureties, such Court or officer may, except in the case of a bond for good behaviour, permit him to 
deposit a sum of money or Government promissory notes to such amount as the Court or officer may fix in lieu of 
executing such bond. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
West Bengal  
In section 445 of the principal Act,— 
(a) the words “with or without sureties” shall be omitted; and  
(b) for the word “permit”, the word “direct” shall be substituted. 
[Vide West Bengal Act 24 of 2003, s. 4.] 
446. Procedure when bond has been forfeited.—(1) Where a bond under this Code is for appearance, or for 
production of property, before a Court and it is proved to the satisfaction of that Court, or of any Court to which the 
case has subsequently been transferred, that the bond has been forfeited,  
or where, in respect of any other bond under this Code, it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court by which the 
bond was taken, or of any Court to which the case has subsequently been transferred, or of the Court of any 
Magistrate of the first class, that the bond has been forfeited, 
the Court shall record the grounds of such proof, and may call upon any person bound by such bond to pay the 
penalty thereof or to show cause why it should not be paid. 
Explanation.—A condition in a bond for appearance, or for production of property, before a Court shall be 
construed as including a condition for appearance, or as the case may be, for production of property, before any 

187 
 
Court to which the case may subsequently be transferred. 
(2) If sufficient cause is not shown and the penalty is not paid, the Court may proceed to recover the same as if 
such penalty were a fine imposed by it under this Code: 
1[Provided that where such penalty is not paid and cannot be recovered in the manner aforesaid, the person so 
bound as surety shall be liable, by order of the Court ordering the recovery of the penalty, to imprisonment in civil 
jail for a term which may extend to six months.]  
(3) The Court may, 2[after recording its reasons for doing so], remit any portion of the penalty mentioned and 
enforce payment in part only. 
(4) Where a surety to a bond dies before the bond is forfeited, his estate shall be discharged from all liability in 
respect of the bond. 
(5) Where any person who has furnished security under section 106 or section 117 or section 360 is convicted 
of an offence the commission of which constitutes a breach of the conditions of his bond, or of a bond executed in 
lieu of his bond under section 448, a certified copy of the judgment of the Court by which he was convicted of such 
offence may be used as evidence in proceedings under this section against his surety or sureties, and, if such 
certified copy is so used, the Court shall presume that such offence was committed by him unless the contrary is 
proved. 
3[446A. Cancellation of bond and bail bond.—Without prejudice to the provisions of section 446, where a 
bond under this Code is for appearance of a person in a case and it is forfeited for breach of a condition,— 
(a) the bond executed by such person as well as the bond, if any, executed by one or more of his sureties in 
that case shall stand cancelled; and 
(b) thereafter no such person shall be released only on his own bond in that case, if the Police Officer or the 
Court, as the case may be, for appearance before whom the bond was executed, is  satisfied that there was no 
sufficient cause for the failure of the person bound by the bond to comply with its condition: 
Provided that subject to any other provisions of this Code he may be released in that case upon the execution of 
a fresh personal bond for such sum of money and bond by one or more of such sureties as the Police Officer or the 
Court, as the case may be, thinks sufficient.] 
447. Procedure in case of insolvency of death of surety or when a bond is forfeited.—When any surety to a 
bond under this Code becomes insolvent or dies, or when any bond is forfeited under the provisions of   section 446, 
the Court by whose order such bond was taken, or a Magistrate of the first class may order the person from whom 
such security was demanded to furnish fresh securities in accordance with the directions of the original order, and if 
such security is not furnished, such Court or Magistrate may proceed as if there had been a default in complying 
with such original order. 
448. Bond required from minor.—When the person required by any Court, or officer to execute a bond is a 
minor, such Court or officer may accept, in lieu thereof, a bond executed by a surety or sureties only. 
449. Appeal from orders under section 446.—All orders passed under section 446 shall be appealable,— 
(i) in the case of an order made by a Magistrate, to the Sessions Judge; 
(ii) in the case of an order made by a Court of Session, to the Court to which an appeal lies from an order 
made by such Court. 
450. Power to direct levy of amount due on certain recognizances.—The High Court or Court of Sessions 
may direct any Magistrate to levy the amount due on a bond for appearance or attendance at such High Court or 
                                                 
1. Added by Act 63 of 1980, s. 6 (w.e.f. 23-9-1980).  
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 40, for “at its discretion” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
3. Ins. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 7 (w.e.f. 23-9-1980).  
 

188 
 
Court of Session. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER XXXIV 
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY 
451. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial in certain cases.—When any property is 
produced before any Criminal Court during any inquiry or trial, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for 
the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the inquiry or trial, and, if the property is subject to 
speedy and natural decay, or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, the Court may, after recording such evidence as it 
thinks necessary, order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “property” includes— 
(a) property of any kind or document which is produced before the Court or which is in its custody; 
(b) any property regarding which an offence appears to have been committed or which appears to have 
been used for the commission of any offence. 
452. Order for disposal of property at conclusion of trial.—(1) When an inquiry or trial in any Criminal 
Court is concluded, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for the disposal, by destruction, confiscation or 
delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to possession thereof or otherwise, of any property or document 
produced before it or in its custody, or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed, or which has 
been used for the commission of any offence. 
(2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) for the delivery of any property to any person claiming to be 
entitled to the possession thereof, without any condition or on condition that he executes a bond, with or without 
securities, to the satisfaction of the Court, engaging to restore such property to the Court if the order made under 
sub-section (1) is modified or set aside on appeal or revision. 
(3) A Court of Session may, instead of itself making an order under sub-section (1), direct the property to be 
delivered to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, who shall thereupon deal with it in the manner provided in sections 457, 
458 and 459. 
(4) Except where the property is livestock or is subject to speedy and natural decay, or where a bond has been 
executed in pursuance of sub-section (2), an order made under sub-section (1) shall not be carried out for two 
months, or when an appeal is presented, until such appeal has been disposed of. 
(5) In this section, the term “property” includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence appears to 
have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under the control of any 
party, but also any property into or for which the same may have been converted or exchanged, and anything 
acquired by such conversion or exchange, whether immediately or otherwise. 
453. Payment to innocent purchaser of money found on accused.—When any person is convicted of any 
offence which includes, or amounts to, theft or receiving stolen property, and it is proved that any other person 
bought the stolen property from him without knowing  or having reason to believe  that the same was stolen, and 
that any money has on his arrest been taken out of the possession of the convicted person, the Court may, on the 
application of such purchaser and on the restitution of the stolen property to the person entitled to the possession 
thereof, order that out of such money a sum not exceeding the price paid by such purchaser be delivered to him. 
454. Appeal against orders under section 452 or section 453.—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made 
by a Court under section 452 or section 453, may appeal against it to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from 
convictions by the former Court. 
(2) On such appeal, the Appellate Court may direct the order to be stayed pending disposal of the appeal, or 
may modify, alter or annul the order and make any further orders that may be just. 
(3) The powers referred to in sub-section (2) may also be exercised by a Court of appeal, confirmation or 
revision while dealing with the case in which the order referred to in sub-section (1) was made. 
455. Destruction of libellous and other matter.—(1) On a conviction under section 292, section 293, section 
501 or section 502 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), the Court may order the destruction of all the copies of the 

189 
 
thing in respect of which the conviction was had, and which are in the custody of the Court or remain in the 
possession or power of the person convicted. 
(2) The Court may, in like manner, on a conviction under section 272, section 273, section 274 or section 275 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), order the food, drink, drug or medical preparation in respect of which the 
conviction was had, to be destroyed. 
456. Power to restore possession of immovable property.—(1) When a person is convicted of an offence 
attended by criminal force or show of force or by criminal intimidation, and it appears to the Court that, by such 
force or show of force or intimidation, any person has been dispossessed of any immovable property, the Court may, 
if it thinks fit, order that possession of the same be restored to that person after evicting by force, if necessary, any 
other person who may be in possession of the property: 
Provided that no such order shall be made by the Court more than one month after the date of the conviction. 
(2) Where the Court trying the offence has not made an order under sub-section (1), the Court of appeal, 
confirmation or revision may, if it thinks fit, make such order while disposing of the appeal, reference or revision, as 
the case may be. 
(3) Where an order has been made under sub-section (1), the provisions of section 454 shall apply in relation 
thereto as they apply in relation to an order under section 453. 
(4) No order made under  this section shall prejudice any right or interest to or in such immovable property 
which any person may be able to establish in a civil suit. 
457. Procedure by police upon seizure of property.—(1) Whenever the seizure of property by any police 
officer is reported to a Magistrate under the provisions of this Code, and such property is not produced before a 
Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the Magistrate may make such order as he thinks fit respecting the disposal 
of such property or the delivery of such property to the person entitled to the possession thereof, or if such person 
cannot be ascertained, respecting the custody and production of such property. 
(2) If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may order the property to be delivered to him on such 
conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if such person is unknown, the Magistrate may detain it and shall, 
in such case, issue a proclamation specifying the articles of which such property consists, and requiring any person 
who may have a claim thereto, to appear before him and establish his claim within six months from the date of such 
proclamation. 
458. Procedure where no claimant appears within six months.—(1) If no person within such period 
establishes his claim to such property, and if the person in whose possession such property was found is unable to 
show that it was legally acquired by him, the Magistrate may  by order direct that such property shall be at the 
disposal of the State Government  and may be sold by that Government and the proceeds of such sale shall be dealt 
with in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) An appeal shall lie against any such order to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from convictions by 
the Magistrate. 
459. Power to sell perishable property.—If the person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown 
or absent and the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, or if the Magistrate to whom its seizure is reported 
is of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit of the owner, or that the value of such property is 1[less than five 
hundred rupees], the Magistrate may at any time direct it to be sold; and the provisions of sections 457 and 458 
shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of such sale. 
CHAPTER XXXV 
IRREGULAR PROCEEDINGS 
460. Irregularities which do not vitiate proceedings.—If any Magistrate not empowered by law to do any of 
the following things, namely:— 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 41, for “less than ten rupees” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

190 
 
(a) to issue a search-warrant under section 94; 
(b) to order, under section 155, the police to investigate an offence; 
(c) to hold an inquest under section 176; 
(d) to issue process under section 187, for the apprehension of a person within his local jurisdiction who 
has committed an offence outside the limits of such jurisdiction; 
(e) to take cognizance of an offence under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 190; 
(f) to make over a case under sub-section (2) of section 192; 
(g) to tender a pardon under section 306; 
(h) to recall a case and try it himself under section 410; or 
(i) to sell property under section 458 or section 459,  
erroneously in good faith does that thing, his proceedings shall not be set aside merely on the ground of his not 
being so empowered. 
461. Irregularities which vitiate proceedings.—If any Magistrate, not being empowered by law in this behalf, 
does any of the following things, namely:— 
(a) attaches and sells property under section 83; 
(b) issues a search-warrant for a document, parcel or other things in the custody of a postal or telegraph 
authority; 
(c) demands security to keep the peace; 
(d) demands security for good behaviour; 
(e) discharges a person lawfully bound to be of good behaviour; 
(f) cancels a bond to keep the peace;  
(g) makes an order for maintenance; 
(h) makes an order under section 133 as to a local nuisance; 
(i) prohibits, under section 143, the repetition or continuance of a public nuisance; 
(j) makes an order under Part C or Part D of Chapter X; 
(k) takes cognizance of an offence under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 190; 
(l) tries an offender; 
(m) tries an offender summarily; 
(n) passes a sentence, under section 325, on proceedings recorded by another Magistrate; 
(o) decides an appeal; 
(p) calls, under section 397, for proceedings; or  
(q) revises an order passed under section 446,  
his proceedings shall be void. 
462. Proceedings in wrong place.—No finding, sentence or order of any Criminal Court shall be set aside 
merely on the ground that the inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the course of which it was arrived at or passed, 
took place in a wrong sessions division, district, sub-division or other local area, unless it appears that such error has 
in fact occasioned a failure of justice.  
463. Non-compliance with provisions of section 164 or section 281.—(1) If any Court before which a 

191 
 
confession or other statement of an accused person recorded, or purporting to be recorded under section 164 or 
section 281, is tendered, or has been received, in evidence finds that any of the provisions of either of such sections 
have not been complied with by the Magistrate recording the statement, it may, notwithstanding anything contained 
in section 91 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), take evidence in regard to such non-compliance, and 
may, if satisfied that such non-compliance has not injured the accused in his defence on the merits and that he duly 
made the statement recorded, admit such statement. 
(2) The provisions of this section apply to Courts of appeal, reference and revision. 
464. Effect of omission to frame, or absence of, or error in, charge.—(1) No finding, sentence or order by a 
Court of competent jurisdiction shall be deemed invalid merely on the ground that no charge was framed or on the 
ground of any error, omission or irregularity in the charge including any misjoinder of charges, unless, in the 
opinion of the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. 
(2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, is of opinion that a failure of justice has in fact been 
occasioned, it may,— 
(a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge, order that a charge be framed, and that the trial be 
recommended from the point immediately after the framing of the charge; 
(b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity in the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a charge 
framed in whatever manner it thinks fit: 
Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the facts of the case are such that no valid charge could be preferred 
against the accused in respect of the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction. 
465. Finding or sentence when reversible by reason of error, omission or irregularity.—(1) Subject to the 
provisions hereinbefore contained, no finding, sentence or order passed by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be 
reversed or altered by a Court of appeal, confirmation of revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in 
the complaint, summons,  warrant, proclamation,  order,  judgment or  other proceedings before  or  during   trial or  
in   any  inquiry or other proceedings under this Code, or any error, or irregularity in any sanction for the 
prosecution, unless in the opinion of that Court, a failure of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. 
(2) In determining whether any error, omission or irregularity in any proceeding under this Code, or any error,      
or irregularity in any sanction for the prosecution has occasioned a failure of justice, the Court shall have regard to 
the fact whether the objection could and should have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings. 
466. Defect or error not to make attachment unlawful.—No attachment made under this Code shall be 
deemed unlawful, nor shall any person making the same be deemed a trespasser, on account of any defect or want of 
form in the summons, conviction, writ of attachment or other proceedings relating thereto. 
CHAPTER XXXVI1 
LIMITATION FOR TAKING COGNIZANCE OF CERTAIN OFFENCES 
467. Definitions.—For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “period of 
limitation” means the period specified in section 468 for taking cognizance of an offence. 
468. Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation.—(1) Except as otherwise provided 
elsewhere in this Code, no Court shall take cognizance of an offence of the category specified in sub-section (2), 
after the expiry of the period of limitation. 
(2) The period of limitation shall be— 
(a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only; 
                                                 
1. Provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to certain economic offences, see the Economic Offences (Inapplicability of 
Limitation) Act, 1974 (12 of 1974), s. 2 and Sch. 

192 
 
(b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year; 
(c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding one year but not 
exceeding three years. 
1[(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of limitation, in relation to offences which may be tried 
together, shall be determined with reference to the offence which is punishable with the more severe punishment or, 
as the case may be, the most severe punishment.] 
469. Commencement of the period of limitation.—(1) The period of limitation, in relation to an offender, 
shall commence,— 
(a) on the date of the offence; or 
(b) where the commission of the offence was not known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to any 
police officer, the first day on which such offence comes to the knowledge of such person or to any police 
officer, whichever is earlier; or  
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, the first day on which the identity of the 
offender is known to the person aggrieved by the offence or to the police officer making investigation into the 
offence, whichever is earlier. 
(2) In computing the said period, the day from which such period is to be computed shall be excluded. 
470. Exclusion of time in certain cases.—(1) In computing the period of limitation, the time during 
which any person has been prosecuting with due diligence another prosecution, whether in a Court of first 
instance or in a Court of appeal or revision, against the offender, shall be excluded: 
Provided that no such exclusion shall be made unless the prosecution relates to the same facts and is 
prosecuted in good faith in a Court which from defect of jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature, is unable 
to entertain it. 
(2) Where the institution of the prosecution in respect of an offence has been stayed by an injunction or 
order, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the 
day on which it was issued or made, and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded. 
(3) Where notice of prosecution for an offence has been given, or where, under any law for the time being  
in force, the previous consent or sanction of the Government or any other authority is required for the 
institution of any prosecution for an offence, then, in computing the period of limitation, the period of such 
notice or, as the case may be, the time required for obtaining such consent or sanction shall be excluded. 
Explanation.—In computing the time required for obtaining the consent or sanction of the Government or 
any other authority, the date on which the application was made for obtaining the consent or sanction and the 
date of receipt of the order of the Government or other authority shall both be excluded. 
(4) In computing the period of limitation, the time during which the offender— 
(a) has been absent from India or from any territory outside India which is under the administration of 
the Central Government, or 
(b) has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing himself,  
shall be excluded. 
471. Exclusion of date on which Court is closed.—Where the period of limitation expires on a day when 
the Court is closed, the Court may take cognizance on the day on which the Court reopens. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 33  (w.e.f. 18.12.1978). 
 

193 
 
Explanation.—A Court shall be deemed to be closed on any day within the meaning of this section, if, 
during its normal working hours, it remains closed on that day. 
472. Continuing offence.—In the case of a continuing offence, a fresh period of limitation shall begin to 
run at every moment of the time during which the offence continues. 
473. Extension of period of limitation in certain cases.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, any Court may take cognizance of an offence after the expiry of the 
period of limitation, if it is satisfied on the facts and in the circumstances of the case that the delay has been 
properly explained or that it is necessary so to do in the interests of justice. 
CHAPTER XXXVII  
MISCELLANEOUS 
 474. Trials before High Courts.—When an offence is tried by the High Court otherwise than under 
section 407, it shall, in the trial of the offence, observe the same procedure as a Court of Sessions would 
observe if it were trying the case. 
475. Delivery to commanding officers of persons liable to be tried by Court-martial.—(1) The Central 
Government may make rules consistent with this Code and the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the Navy Act, 1957 
(62 of 1957), and the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), and any other law, relating to the Armed Forces of the 
Union, for the time being in force, as to cases in which persons subject to military, naval or air-force law, or such 
other law, shall be tried by a Court to which this Code applies, or by a Court-martial; and when any person is 
brought before a Magistrate and charged with an offence for which he is liable to be tried either by a Court to which 
this Code applies or by a Court-martial, such Magistrate shall have regard to such rules, and shall in proper cases 
deliver him, together with a statement of the offence of  which he is accused,  to  the commanding  officer of the 
unit to which he belongs, or to the commanding officer of the nearest military, naval or air-force station, as the case 
may be, for the purpose of being tried by a Court-martial. 
Explanation.—In this section— 
(a) “Unit” includes a regiment, corps, ship, detachment, group, battalion or Company, 
(b) “Court-martial” includes any Tribunal with the powers similar to those of a Court-martial constituted 
under the relevant law applicable to the Armed Forces of the Union. 
(2) Every Magistrate shall, on receiving a written application for that purpose by the commanding officer of any 
unit or body of soldiers, sailors or airmen stationed or employed at any such place, use his utmost endeavours to 
apprehend and secure any person accused of such offence. 
(3) A High Court may, if it thinks fit, direct that a prisoner detained in any jail situate within the State be 
brought before a Court-martial for trial or to be examined touching any matter pending before the Court-martial. 
476. Forms.—Subject to the power conferred by article 227 of the Constitution, the forms set forth in the 
Second Schedule, with such variations as the circumstances of each case require, may be used for the respective 
purposes therein mentioned, and if used shall be sufficient. 
477. Power of High Court to make rules.—(1) Every High Court may, with the previous approval of the State 
Government, make rules— 
(a) as to the persons who may be permitted to act as petition-writers in the Criminal Courts subordinate to 
it; 
(b) regulating the issue of licences to such persons, the conduct of business by them, and the scale of fees to 
be charged by them; 

194 
 
(c) providing a penalty for a contravention of any of the rules so made and determining the authority by 
which such contravention may be investigated and the penalties imposed; 
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(2) All rules made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette. 
1[478. Power to alter functions allocated to Executive Magistrate in certain cases.—If the Legislative 
Assembly of a State by a resolution so permits, the State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, 
by notification, direct that references in sections 108, 109, 110, 145 and 147 to an Executive Magistrate shall be 
construed as references to a Judicial Magistrate of the first class.] 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Union territories of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep 
In the Code, as it applies to the Union territories to which this Regulation extends, in sections, 478, the 
words “if the State Legislature by a resolution so requires.” Shall be omitted. 
[Vide The Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Regulation, 1974 Act (1 of 1974) s. 6.] 
479. Case in which Judge or Magistrate is personally interested.—No Judge or Magistrate shall, except with 
the permission of the Court to which an appeal lies from his Court, try or commit for trial any case to or in which he 
is a party, or personally interested, and no Judge or Magistrate shall hear an appeal from any judgment or order 
passed or made by himself. 
Explanation.—A Judge or Magistrate shall not be deemed to be a party to, or personally interested in, any case 
by reason only that he is concerned therein in a public capacity, or by reason only that he has viewed the place in 
which an offence is alleged to have been committed, or any other place in which any other transaction material to 
the case is alleged to have occurred, and made an inquiry in connection with the case. 
480. Practising pleader not to sit as Magistrate in certain Courts.—No pleader who practises in the Court of 
any Magistrate shall sit as a Magistrate in that Court or in any Court within the local jurisdiction of that Court. 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Karnataka  
Insertion of new section 480A. —After section 480 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Central Act 2 of 
1974) the following Section shall be inserted, namely:— 
“480A. Other powers of Magistrate.—Any Judicial Magistrate or Executive Magistrate shall be entitled to 
attest, verify or authenticate any document brought before him for the purpose of attestation, verification or 
authentication, as the case may be, and to affix seals thereon, as may be prescribed by any law for the time being in 
force.”. 
[Vide Karnataka Act 35 of 1984, s. 2] 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 63 of 1980, s. 8, for s. 478 (w.e.f. 23-9-1980).  

195 
 
481. Public servant concerned in sale not to purchase or bid for property.—A public servant having any 
duty to perform in connection with the sale of any property under this Code shall not purchase or bid for the 
property. 
482. Saving of inherent powers of High Court.—Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to limit or affect the 
inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this 
Code, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. 
483. Duty of High Court to exercise continuous superintendence over Courts of Judicial Magistrates.—
Every High Court shall so exercise its superintendence over the Courts of Judicial Magistrates subordinate to it as to 
ensure that there is an expeditious and proper disposal of cases by such Magistrates. 
484. Repeal and savings.—(1) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal— 
(a) if, immediately before the date on which this Code comes into force, there is any appeal, application, 
trial, inquiry or investigation pending, then, such appeal, application, trial, inquiry or investigation shall be 
disposed of, continued, held or made, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), as in force immediately before such commencement (hereinafter referred 
to as the old Code), as if this Code had not come into force:  
Provided that every inquiry under Chapter XVIII of the Old Code, which is pending at the commencement 
of this Code, shall be dealt with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Code; 
(b) all notifications published, proclamations issued, powers conferred, forms prescribed, local jurisdictions 
defined, sentences passed and orders, rules and appointments, not being appointments as Special Magistrates, 
made under the Old Code and which are in force immediately before the commencement of this Code, shall be 
deemed, respectively, to have been published, issued, conferred, prescribed, defined, passed or made under the 
corresponding provisions of this Code; 
(c) any sanction accorded or consent given under the Old Code in pursuance of which no proceeding was 
commenced under that Code, shall be deemed to have been accorded or given under the corresponding 
provisions of this Code and proceedings may be commenced under this Code in pursuance of such sanction of 
consent; 
(d) the provisions of the Old Code shall continue to apply in relation to every prosecution against a Ruler 
within the  meaning of article 363 of the Constitution. 
(3) Where the period prescribed for an application or other proceeding under the Old Code had expired on or 
before the commencement of this Code, nothing in this Code shall be construed as enabling any such application to 
be made or proceeding to be commenced under this Code by reason only of the fact that a longer period therefor is 
prescribed by this Code or provisions are made in this Code for the extension of time. 
 
 
 
 

196 
 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES 
EXPLANATORY NOTES: 
(1)  In regard to offences under the Indian Penal Code, the entries in the second and 
third columns against a section the number of which is given in the first column are 
not intended as the definition of, and the punishment prescribed for, the offence in 
the Indian Penal Code, but merely as indication of the substance of the section. 
 
(2)  In this Schedule, (i) the expression “Magistrate of the first class” and “Any 
Magistrate” include Metropolitan Magistrates but not Executive Magistrates; (ii) the 
word “cognizable” stands for “a police officer may arrest without warrant”; and (iii) 
the word “non-cognizable” stands for “a police officer shall not arrest without 
warrant”. 
I.–OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
Section  
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or non-
cognizable 
Bailable or Non-
bailable 
By what 
Court triable 
  1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6      
CHAPTER V. –ABETMENT  
109 
Abetment of any offence, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence, and where no 
express provision is made for its punishment. 
Same as for offence 
abetted. 
According as offence 
abetted is cognizable 
or non-cognizable. 
According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non-
bailable. 
Court by 
which 
offence 
abetted is 
triable. 
110 
Abetment of any offence, if the person abetted 
does the act with a different intention from 
that of the abettor. 
Ditto  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
111 
Abetment of any offence, when one act is 
abetted and  a different act is done; subject to 
the proviso. 
Same as  for offence 
intended to be abetted. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
113 
Abetment of any offence, when an effect is 
caused by the act abetted different from that 
intended by the abettor. 
Same as for offence 
committed. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
114 
Abetment of any offence, if abettor is present 
when offence is committed. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
115 
Abetment of an offence, punishable with death 
or imprisonment for life, if the offence be not 
committed in consequence of the abetment. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Non-bailable 
Ditto. 
 
If an act which causes harm be done in 
consequence of the abetment. 
Imprisonment for 14 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
116 
Abetment of any offence, punishable with 
imprisonment, if the offence be not committed 
in consequence of the abetment. 
Imprisonment extending to 
a quarter part of the longest 
term 
provided 
for 
the 
offence, or fine, or both.  
Ditto 
According as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non-
bailable. 
Ditto. 
 
 
If the abettor or the person abetted   be   a   
public  servant whose duty it is to prevent the 
offence. 
Imprisonment extending to 
half of the longest term   
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.       
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 

197 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
117 
Abetting the commission of an offence by the 
public  or by more than ten persons. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
According as offence 
abetted is cognizable 
or non-cognizable. 
According 
as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non-
bailable. 
Court by 
which 
offence 
abetted is 
triable. 
118 
Concealing a design to commit an offence 
punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life, if the offence be committed. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Non-bailable. 
Ditto. 
 
If the offence be not committed 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Bailable. 
Ditto. 
119 
A public servant concealing a design to 
commit an offence which it is his duty to 
prevent, if the offence be committed. 
Imprisonment extending to 
half of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
According 
as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non-
bailable. 
Ditto. 
 
If the offence be punishable with death or 
imprisonment for life. 
Imprisonment for 10 years. 
Ditto 
Non-bailable. 
Ditto. 
 
If the offence be not committed. 
Imprisonment extending to 
a quarter part of the longest 
term 
provided 
for 
the 
offence, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Bailable. 
Ditto. 
120 
Concealing a design to commit an offence 
punishable with imprisonment, if offence be 
committed. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
According 
as 
offence abetted is 
bailable or non-
bailable. 
Ditto. 
 
If the offence be not committed. 
Imprisonment extending to 
one-eighth part of the 
longest term provided for 
the offence, or fine, or 
both. 
Ditto 
Bailable. 
Ditto. 
CHAPTER VA.–CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY 
120B 
Criminal conspiracy to commit an offence 
punishable with death, imprisonment for life 
or rigorous imprisonment for a term of 2 years 
or upwards. 
Same as for abetment of 
the offence which is the 
object of the conspiracy. 
According as the 
offence which is the 
object of conspiracy 
is cognizable or non-
cognizable. 
According as 
offence which is 
object of 
conspiracy is 
bailable or non-
bailable. 
Court by 
which 
abetment of 
the offence 
which is the 
object of 
conspiracy is 
triable. 
 
Any other criminal conspiracy. 
Imprisonment 
 
for   
6 months, or fine, or both.  
Non-cognizable. 
Bailable. 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
CHAPTER VI.–OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE 
121 
Waging or attempting to wage war, or abetting 
the waging of war, against the Government of 
India. 
Death,  or imprisonment 
for life and fine. 
Cognizable. 
Non-bailable. 
Court of 
Session. 
121A 
Conspiring to commit certain offences against 
the State. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
122 
Collecting arms, etc., with the intention of 
waging war against the Government of India. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
123 
Concealing  with intent to facilitate a design to 
wage war. 
Imprisonment for 10 years  
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
124 
Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent 
to compel or restrain the exercise of any lawful 
power.  
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 

198 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
124A 
Sedition 
Imprisonment for life and 
fine, or imprisonment for  
3 years and fine, or fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
125 
Waging war against any Asiatic power in 
alliance or at peace with the Government of 
India, or abetting the waging of such war. 
Imprisonment for life and 
fine, or imprisonment for 7 
years and fine, or fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
126 
Committing depredation on the territories of 
any power in alliance or at peace with the 
Government of India. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine, and forfeiture of 
certain property. 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
127 
Receiving 
property 
taken 
by 
war 
or 
depredation mentioned in sections 125 and 
126. 
Ditto. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
128 
Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of 
State or war in his custody to escape.  
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
129 
Public servant negligently suffering prisoner 
of State of  war in his custody to escape. 
Simple imprisonment for 3 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
          Bailable  
Magistrate of 
the 
first 
class. 
130 
Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring, such 
prisoner, or offering any resistance to the 
recapture of such prisoner. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
       Non-bailable  
Court 
of 
Session. 
CHAPTER VII.–OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVY AND AIR FORCE 
131 
Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce an 
officer, soldier, sailor or airman from his 
allegiance or duty. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Cognizable 
    Non-bailable 
Court 
of 
Session. 
132 
Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in 
consequence thereof. 
Death, or imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for 
10 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
133 
Abetment of an assault by an officer, soldier, 
sailor or airman on his superior officer, when 
in the execution of his office. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the 
first 
class. 
134 
Abetment of such assault, if the assault is 
committed. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
135 
Abetment of the desertion of an officer, 
soldier, sailor or airman. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
          Bailable 
  Any 
Magistrate. 
136 
Harbouring such an officer,. soldier, sailor or 
airman who has deserted. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
137 
Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel, 
through negligence of master or person in 
charge thereof. 
Fine of 500 rupees. 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
138 
Abetment of act of insubordination by an 
officer, soldier, sailor or airman, if the offence 
be committed in consequence. 
Imprisonment 
for   
6 months, or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
140 
Wearing the dress or carrying any token used by a 
soldier, sailor or airman with intent that it may be 
believed that he is such a soldier, sailor or airman. 
Imprisonment 
for 
3 
months, 
or 
fine 
of   
500  rupees, or both. 
Ditto. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
CHAPTER VIII.–OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILITY 
143 
Being member of an unlawful assembly. 
Imprisonment 
for   
6 months, or fine, or both.  
              Cognizable  
Bailable 
Any  
Magistrate. 
144 
Joining an unlawful assembly armed with any 
deadly weapon.  
 Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
                Ditto 
Bailable 
Ditto 
145 
Joining or continuing in an unlawful assembly, 
knowing that it has been commanded to 
disperse.  
Ditto 
                Ditto 
         Ditto 
Ditto. 
147 
Rioting. 
Ditto 
                Ditto 
         Ditto 
Ditto. 

199 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
148 
Rioting, armed with a deadly weapon.  
 Imprisonment for  3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
149 
If an offence be committed by any member of 
an unlawful assembly, every other member of 
such assembly shall be guilty of the offence. 
The same as for the 
offence. 
According as offence 
is cognizable or  non-
cognizable 
According  as 
offence is bailable 
or non-bailable 
The Court by 
which the 
offence is 
triable. 
150 
Hiring, engaging or employing persons to take 
part in  an unlawful assembly. 
The same as for a member 
of such assembly, and for 
any offence committed by 
any 
member 
of 
such 
assembly. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
151 
Knowingly joining or continuing in any 
assembly of five or more persons after it has 
been commanded to disperse. 
Imprisonment 
for 
6 
months, or fine or both. 
Ditto 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
152 
Assaulting or obstructing  public servant when 
suppressing riot, etc. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or  both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
153 
Wantonly giving provocation with intent to 
cause riot, if rioting be committed. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
 
If not committed. 
Imprisonment 
for   
6 months, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
153A 
Promoting enmity between classes. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Non-bailable 
Ditto 
 
Promoting enmity between classes in place of 
worship, etc. 
Imprisonment for 5 years, 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
1[153A
A 
Knowingly carrying arms in any procession or 
organising or holding or taking part in any 
mass drill or mass training with arms. 
Imprisonment for 6 months 
and fine of 2,000 rupees 
Ditto 
 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate.] 
153B 
Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national 
integration. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine,  or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
2[Magistrate 
of the first-
class.] 
 
If committed in a place of public worship, etc. 
Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
154 
Owner or occupier of land not giving 
information of riot, etc. 
Fine of 1,000 rupees. 
Non-cognizable  
Bailable  
     Any     
Magistrate. 
155 
Person for whose benefit or on whose behalf a 
riot takes place not using all lawful means to 
prevent it. 
Fine 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
156 
Agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit 
a riot is committed not using all lawful means 
to prevent it. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
157 
Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful 
assembly. 
Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
158 
Being hired to take part in an unlawful 
assembly or riot. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
 
Or to go armed. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or  both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
160 
Committing affray 
Imprisonment 
for 
one 
month, or fine of 100 
rupees or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42 (date yet to be notified, see appendix) 
2. Subs. by s. 42, for “Ditto”, ibid. (date yet to be notified, see appendix) 

200 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
CHAPTER IX.–OFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS 
CHAPTER IXA.—OFFENCES RELATING TO ELECTIONS 
171E 
Bribery. 
Imprisonment for 1 year or 
fine, or   both, or if treating 
only, fine only.  
      Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
 Magistrate 
of   the first 
class. 
171F 
Undue influence at an election. 
Personation at an election 
Imprisonment for one year,  
or fine, or   both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
Ditto. 
171G 
False statement in connection with an election. 
Fine 
      Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
  171H 
Illegal payments in connection with elections. 
Fine of 500 rupees. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
  171-I 
Failure to keep election accounts. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  
161 
Being or  expecting to be a public servant, and 
taking a gratification other  than legal 
remuneration in respect of an official act. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
             Cognizable 
       Non-bailable  
 Magistrate 
of the first 
class. 
162 
Taking a gratification in order, by corrupt or 
illegal means, to influence a public servant.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
163 
Taking a gratification for the exercise of 
personal influence with  a public servant. 
Simple imprisonment for    
1 year, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
164 
Abetment by public servant of the offences 
defined in the last two preceding clauses with 
reference to himself.  
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
165 
Public servant obtaining any valuable thing, 
without consideration, from a person concerned 
in any proceeding or business transacted by 
such public servant. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
165A 
Punishment 
for 
abetment 
of 
offences 
punishable under section 161 or section 165. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
166 
Public servant disobeying a direction of the law 
with intent to cause injury to any person. 
Simple imprisonment for   
1 year, or fine, or both. 
      Non-cognizable  
          Bailable  
Ditto. 
1[166A Public servant disobeying direction under law 
Imprisonment  for 
minimum 6 months 
which may extend to 2 
years and fine. 
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class 
166B 
Non-treatment of victim by hospital 
Imprisonment for 1 year 
or fine or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class.] 
167 
Public servant framing an incorrect document 
with  intent to cause injury. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
        Cognizable 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
168 
Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade. 
Simple imprisonment for 
1 year, or fine, or both. 
    Non-cognizable 
 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
169 
Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for 
property. 
Simple imprisonment for 
2 years, or fine, or both 
and confiscation of 
property, if purchased. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
170 
Personating a public servant. 
Imprisonment for 2 years 
or fine, or   both . 
       Cognizable 
      Non-bailable  
Any  
Magistrate. 
171 
Wearing garb or carrying token used by public 
servant with fraudulent intent. 
Imprisonment 
for   
3  months, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
           Bailable  
Ditto. 

201 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
CHAPTER X.–CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS 
172 
Absconding to avoid service of summons or 
other proceeding from a public servant. 
Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
  Bailable  
Any Magistrate. 
 
If summons or notice require attendance in 
person, etc., in a Court of Justice. 
Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
173 
Preventing the service or the affixing of any 
summons of notice, or the removal of it when 
it 
has 
been 
affixed, 
or 
preventing 
a 
proclamation. 
Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If summons, etc., require attendance in person, 
etc., in a Court of Justice. 
Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
174 
Not obeying a legal order to attend at a certain 
place in person or by agent, or departing there 
from without authority. 
Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If the order requires personal attendance, etc., 
in a Court of Justice. 
Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
1[174A 
Failure to appear at specified place and 
specified time as required by a proclamation 
published under sub-section (1) of section 82 
of this Code 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or with fine, or with both 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 
In a case where declaration has been made 
under sub-section (4) of section 82 of this 
Code pronouncing a person as proclaimed 
offender 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto]. 
175 
Intentionally omitting to produce a document 
to a public servant by a person legally bound 
to produce or deliver such document. 
Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
2[Non-
cognizable] 
2[Bailable] 
The Court in which 
the 
offence 
is 
committed, subject to 
the 
provisions 
of 
Chapter XXVI; or, if  
not committed, in a 
court, any Magistrate. 
 
If the document is required to be produced in 
or delivered to a Court of Justice. 
Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
176 
Intentionally omitting to give notice or 
information to a public servant by a person 
legally bound to give such notice or 
information. 
Simple imprisonment for   
1 month, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Any Magistrate. 
 
If the notice or information required respects 
the commission of an offence, etc. 
Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
 
If the notice or information is required by an 
order passed under sub-section (1) of section 
356 of this Code. 
 Imprisonment  for            
6 months, or fine of  1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
177 
Knowingly furnishing false information to a 
public servant. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If the information required respects the 
commission of an offence, etc. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2.  Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for the word “Ditto”, for the respective entries in column 4 and 5 relating to s.175  (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

202 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
178 
Refusing oath when duly required to take oath 
by a public servant. 
Simple imprisonment for  
6 months, or fine of   
1,000 rupees, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable 
The Court in which 
the offence is 
committed, subject to 
the provisions of 
Chapter XXVI; or, if 
not committed in a 
Court, any 
Magistrate. 
179 
Being legally bound to state truth, and refusing 
to answer questions.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
 Ditto 
             Ditto. 
180 
Refusing to sign a statement made to a public 
servant when legally required to do so.  
Simple imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
181 
Knowingly stating to a public servant on oath 
as true that which is false. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
182 
Giving false information to a public servant in 
order to cause him to use his lawful power to 
the injury or annoyance of any person. 
Imprisonment 
for 
6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any Magistrate.. 
183 
Resistance to the taking of property by the  
lawful  authority of a public servant. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
184 
Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by 
authority of a public servant. 
Imprisonment for 1 month, 
or fine of 500 rupees, or 
both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
185 
Bidding, by a person under a legal incapacity 
to purchase it, for property at a lawfully   
authorised  sale, or bidding without intending 
to perform the  obligations incurred thereby. 
Imprisonment for 1 month, 
or fine of 200 rupees, or 
both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
186 
Obstructing public servant in discharge of his 
public functions. 
Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
187 
Omission to assist public servant when bound 
by law to give such assistance. 
Simple imprisonment for 1 
month, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
Wilfully neglecting to aid a public servant who 
demands aid in the execution of process, the 
prevention of offences, etc.  
Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
188 
Disobedience 
to 
an 
order 
lawfully 
promulgated by a public servant, if such 
disobedience causes obstruction, annoyance or 
injury to persons lawfully employed. 
Simple imprisonment for 1 
month, or fine of 200 
rupees, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If such disobedience causes danger to human 
life, health or safety, etc. 
Imprisonment 
for 
6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
189 
Threatening a public servant with injury to 
him or one in whom he is interested, to induce 
him to do or forbear to do any official act. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
        Non-
cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
190 
Threatening any person to induce him to 
refrain from making a legal application for 
protection from injury. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 

203 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
 
CHAPTER XI.–FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE 
193 
Giving or fabricating false evidence in a 
judicial proceeding. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 
Giving or fabricating false evidence in any 
other case 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any Magistrate. 
194 
Giving or fabricating false evidence with 
intent to cause any person to be convicted of 
capital  offence. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Non-
bailable 
Court of session. 
 
If innocent person be thereby convicted and 
executed. 
Death, or as above. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
195 
Giving or fabricating false evidence with 
intent to procure conviction of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment for life or with 
imprisonment for 7 years, or upwards. 
The same as for the 
offence. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
1[195A 
Threatening any person to give false evidence. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Court by which 
offence of giving 
false evidence is 
triable. 
 
If innocent person is convicted and sentenced 
in consequence of false evidence with death, 
or imprisonment for more than seven years. 
The same as for the 
offence. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto] 
196 
Using in a judicial proceeding evidence 
known to be false or fabricated. 
The same as for giving or 
fabricating false evidence. 
2[Non-cognizable] 
According 
as offence 
of giving 
such 
evidence 
is bailable 
or 
non-
bailable. 
Court by which 
offence of giving or 
fabricating false 
evidence is triable. 
197 
Knowingly 
issuing 
or 
signing 
a 
false 
certificate relating to any fact of which such 
certificate is by law admissible in evidence. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Bailable 
Court by  which 
offence of giving false 
evidence is triable. 
198 
Using as a true certificate  one known to be 
false in a material point. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
199 
False statement made in any declaration which 
is by law receivable as evidence. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
200 
Using as true any such declaration known to 
be false. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
201 
Causing disappearance of evidence of an 
offence 
committed, 
or 
giving 
false 
information touching it to screen the offender, 
if a capital offence. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
According 
as 
the 
offence in relation to 
which 
disappearance 
of evidence is caused 
is cognizable or non-
cognizable. 
Ditto 
Court of Session. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  
      Non-cognizable  
Ditto 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 
If punishable with less than 10 years’ 
imprisonment.  
Imprisonment for a quarter 
of 
the 
longest 
term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court by which the 
offence is triable. 
202 
Intentional omission to give information of an 
offence by a person legally bound to inform. 
Imprisonment 
for 
6 
months, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any Magistrate. 
203 
Giving false information respecting an offence 
committed. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16-4-2006). 
2.  Subs. by s. 7, ibid. for the word “Ditto”, occurring in column 4 relating to s.196  (w.e.f. 16-4-2006). 

204 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
204 
Secreting or destroying any document to 
prevent its production as evidence. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Non-cognizable  
Bailable  
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
205 
False personation for  the purpose of any act 
or 
proceeding 
in 
a 
suit 
or 
criminal 
prosecution, or for becoming bail or security. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
206 
Fraudulent removal or concealment, etc., of 
property to prevent its seizure as a forfeiture 
or in satisfaction of a fine under sentence, or in 
execution of a decree. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any Magistrate. 
207 
Claiming property without right, or practicing 
deception touching any right to it, to prevent its 
being taken as a forfeiture, or in satisfaction of a 
fine under sentence, or in execution of a decree. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
208 
Fraudulently suffering a decree to pass for a 
sum not due, or suffering decree to be 
executed after it has been satisfied. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
209 
False claim in a Court of Justice. 
Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
210 
Fraudulently obtaining a decree for a sum not 
due, or causing a decree to be executed after it 
has been satisfied. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
211 
False charge of offence made with intent to 
injure.     
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If offence charged be punishable with 
imprisonment for 7 years or upwards. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
 
If offence charged be capital or punishable 
with imprisonment for life.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of Session. 
212 
Harbouring an offender, if the offence be 
capital. 
Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for 1 year 
and not for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term, and of 
the descriptions, provided 
for the offence, or fine, or 
both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
213 
Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from 
punishment if the offence be capital. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for less than  
10 years. 
Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
214 
Offering gift or restoration of property in 
consideration of screening offender if the 
offence be capital. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for less than 
10 years. 
Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term, 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
215 
Taking gift to help to recover movable 
property of which a person has been deprived  
by an offence without causing apprehension of 
offender. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 

205 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
216 
 
Harbouring an offender who has escaped from 
custody, or whose apprehension has been 
ordered, if the offence be capital. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine.  
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
with or without fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for 1 year 
and not for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for a quarter 
of the longest term 
provided for the offence, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
216A 
Harbouring robbers or dacoits. 
Rigorous imprisonment for 
7 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
217 
Public servant disobeying a direction of law with 
intent to save person from punishment, or 
property from forfeiture. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Any Magistrate. 
218 
Public servant framing an    incorrect record or 
writing with intent to save person from 
punishment, or property from forfeiture. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
219 
Public servant in a judicial proceeding 
corruptly making and pronouncing an order, 
report, verdict, or decision which he knows to 
be contrary to law. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Non- cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
220 
Commitment for trial or confinement by a 
person having authority, who knows that he is 
acting contrary to law. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
221 
Intentional omission to apprehend on the part 
of a public servant bound by law to apprehend 
an offender, if the offence be capital. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
with or without fine. 
According 
as 
the 
offence in relation to 
which such omission 
has been made is 
cognizable or non-
cognizable. 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
with or without fine. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If punishable with imprisonment for less than 
10 years. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
with or without fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
222 
Intentional omission to apprehend on the part 
of a public servant bound by law to apprehend 
person under sentence of a Court of Justice if 
under sentence of death. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 14 years, 
with or without fine. 
Ditto 
Non-
bailable 
Court of Session. 
 
If under sentence of imprisonment for life or 
imprisonment for 10 years, or upwards. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
with or without fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 
If under sentence of imprisonment for less 
than 10 years or lawfully committed to 
custody. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Bailable 
Ditto. 
223 
Escape from confinement negligently suffered 
by a public servant. 
Simple imprisonment for  
2 years, or fine, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Any Magistrate. 
224 
Resistance or obstruction by a person to his 
lawful apprehension.  
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
225 
Resistance or obstruction to the lawful 
apprehension of any person, or rescuing him 
from lawful custody. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If charged with an offence punishable with 
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for 10 
years. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Non-
bailable 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 
If charged with a capital offence. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 

206 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
 
If the person is sentenced to imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for 10 years, or upwards. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
  Cognizable  
Non-
bailable  
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
 
If under sentence of death 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of Session. 
225A 
Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of 
escape on part of public servant, in cases not 
otherwise provided for:– 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (a) in case of intentional omission or 
sufferance;  
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.                      
Non-cognizable 
Bailable 
        
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
  (b) in case of negligent omission or 
sufferance. 
Simple imprisonment for  
2 years, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
   Ditto 
Any Magistrate. 
225B 
Resistance 
or 
obstruction 
to 
lawful 
apprehension, or escape or rescue in cases not 
otherwise provided for. 
Imprisonment 
for   
6 months, or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
227 
Violation of condition of remission of 
punishment. 
Punishment 
of 
original 
sentence, or if part of the 
punishment 
has 
been 
undergone, the residue. 
Ditto 
Non-
bailable 
The Court by which 
the original offence 
was triable. 
228 
Intentional insult or interruption to a public 
servant sitting in any stage of a judicial  
proceeding. 
Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable 
The Court in which the 
offence is committed 
subject to the provisions 
of Chapter XXVI. 
1[228A 
Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain 
offences, etc. 
Imprisonment 
for 
two 
years and fine. 
     Cognizable  
Ditto 
Any Magistrate. 
        
Printing or publication of a proceeding 
without prior permission of court. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto.] 
229 
Personation of a juror or assessor.  
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
2[229A 
Failure by person released on bail or bond to 
appear in Court 
Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both 
Cognizable 
Non-
bailable 
Any Magistrate.] 
CHAPTER XII.–OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS 
231 
Counterfeiting, or performing any part of the 
process of counterfeiting, coin. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
          Cognizable  
    Non-bailable  
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
232 
Counterfeiting, or performing any part of the 
process of counterfeiting, Indian coin. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
233 
Making, buying or selling instrument for the 
purpose of counterfeiting  coin. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
234 
Making, buying or selling instrument for the 
purpose of counterfeiting Indian coin. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
235 
Possession of instrument or material for the 
purpose of using the same for counterfeiting 
coin. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
 
If Indian coin. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 5 (w.e.f. 25.12.1983). 
2.  Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 

 
207 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
236 
Abetting, in India, the counterfeiting, out of 
India, of coin. 
The punishment provided for 
abetting the counterfeiting of 
such coin within India.  
          Cognizable  
    Non-bailable  
Court of 
Session. 
237 
Import or export of counterfeit coin, knowing the 
same to be counterfeit.  
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
238  
Import or export of counterfeit of Indian coin, 
knowing the same to be counterfeit. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
239 
 Having any counterfeit coin known to be such when 
it came into possession, and delivering, etc., the 
same to any person. 
Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine. 
   Ditto 
  Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
240 
Same with respect to Indian coin. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
241 
Knowingly delivering to another any counterfeit 
coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the 
deliverer did not know to be counterfeit. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or 10 times the 
value 
of 
the 
coin 
counterfeited, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
242 
Possession of counterfeit coin by a person who 
knew it to be counterfeit when he became 
possessed thereof. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
243 
Possession of Indian coin by a person who knew 
it to be counterfeit when he became possessed 
thereof. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
244 
Person employed in a Mint causing coin to be of 
a different weight or composition from that fixed 
by law. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
245 
Unlawfully taking from a Mint any coining 
instrument. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
246 
Fraudulently diminishing the weight or altering 
the composition of Indian coin. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
247 
Fraudulently diminishing the weight or altering 
the composition of Indian coin. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
248 
Altering appearance of any coin with intent that it 
shall pass as a coin of a different description. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
249 
Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent 
that it shall pass as a coin of a different 
description. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
250 
Delivery to another of coin possessed with the 
knowledge that it is altered. 
Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
251 
Delivery of Indian coin possessed with the 
knowledge that it is altered. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
252 
Possession of altered coin by a person who knew 
it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
253 
Possession of Indian coin by a person who knew 
it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof. 
Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
254 
Delivery to another of coin as genuine which, 
when first possessed, the deliverer did not know 
to be altered. 
Imprisonment for 2 years 
or fine, or 10 times the 
value of the coin. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
255 
Counterfeiting a Government stamp. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
256 
Having possession of an instrument or material 
for the purpose of counterfeiting a Government 
stamp. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 

208 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
257 
Making, buying or selling instrument for the 
purpose of counterfeiting a Government stamp. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
258 
Sale of counterfeit Government stamp. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
259 
Having possession of a counterfeit Government 
stamp. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Bailable 
Ditto. 
260 
Using as genuine a Government stamp known to 
be counterfeit.  
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
261 
Effacing any  writing  from a substance bearing a 
Government stamp, removing from a document a 
stamp used for it, with intent to cause a loss to 
Government. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
262 
Using a Government stamp known to have been 
before used. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine,  or both.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
263 
Erasure of mark denoting that stamps have been 
used. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
263A 
Fictitious stamps  
Fine of 200 rupees 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
CHAPTER XIII.–OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
264 
Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both. 
   Non-cognizable  
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
265 
Fraudulent use of false weight or measure. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
266 
Being in possession of false weights or measures 
for fraudulent use. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
267 
Making or selling false weights or measures for 
fraudulent use. 
Ditto. 
        Cognizable   
     Non-bailable  
Ditto. 
CHAPTER XIV.–OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCY AND MORALS 
269 
Negligently doing any act known to be likely to 
spread infection of any disease dangerous to 
life. 
Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both. 
    Cognizable  
     Bailable  
Any 
Magistrate. 
270 
Malignantly doing any act known to be likely 
to spread infection of any disease dangerous to 
life. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
271 
Knowingly disobeying any quarantine rule. 
Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both. 
   Non-cognizable  
Ditto 
Ditto. 
272 
Adulterating food or drink intended for sale, so 
as to make the same noxious. 
Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
273 
Selling any food or drink as food  and drink, 
knowing the same to be noxious. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
274 
Adulterating any drug or medical preparation 
intended for sale so as to lessen its efficacy, or 
to change its operation, or to make it noxious. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
1[Non-bailable] 
Ditto. 
275 
Offering for sale or issuing from a dispensary 
any drug or medical preparation known to have 
been adulterated. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
 2[Bailable] 
Ditto. 
276 
Knowingly selling or issuing from a dispensary 
any drug or medical preparation as a different 
drug or medical preparation. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
                                                 
1.  Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42(f)(i),  for the word “Ditto”, occurring  in column 5 relating to s. 274  (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2 . Subs. by s. 42 (f) (ii), ibid., for the word “Ditto”, occurring in column 5 relating to s. 275 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  

209 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
277 
Defiling the water of a public spring or 
reservoir. 
Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
278 
Making atmosphere noxious to health. 
Fine of 500 rupees 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
279 
Driving or riding on a public way so rashly or 
negligently as to endanger human life, etc. 
Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 280 
Navigating any vessel so rashly or negligently 
as to endanger human life, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
281 
Exhibition of a false light, mark or buoy. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
282 
Conveying for hire any person by water, in a 
vessel in such a state, or so loaded, as to 
endanger his life. 
Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
283 
Causing danger, obstruction or, injury in any 
public way or line of navigation. 
Fine of 200 rupees. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
284 
Dealing with any poisonous substance so as to 
endanger human life, etc. 
Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine of 1,000 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
285 
Dealing with fire or any combustible matter so 
as to endanger human life, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
286 
So dealing with any explosive substance. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
287 
So dealing with any machinery. 
Ditto 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
288 
A person omitting to guard against probable 
danger to human life by the fall of any building 
over which he has a right entitling him to pull it 
down or repair it. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
289 
A person omitting to take order with any 
animal in his possession, so as to guard against 
danger to human life, or of grievous hurt, from 
such animal. 
Ditto 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
290 
Committing a public nuisance. 
Fine of 200 rupees 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
291 
Continuance of nuisance after injunction to 
discontinue. 
Simple imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
292 
Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc. 
On first conviction, with 
imprisonment for 2 years, 
and with fine of 2,000 
rupees, and, in the event of 
second or subsequent 
conviction, with 
imprisonment for five 
years, and with fine of 
5,000 rupees. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
293 
Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young persons. 
On first conviction, with 
imprisonment for 3 years, 
and with fine of 2,000 
rupees, and in the event of 
second or subsequent 
conviction, with 
imprisonment for 7 years, 
and with fine of 5,000 
rupees. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
294 
Obscene songs 
Imprisonment for 3 
months, or fine  or  both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
294A 
Keeping a lottery office 
Imprisonment for 6 
months, or fine,  or  both. 
    Non-cognizable  
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
Publishing proposals relating to lotteries. 
Fine of 1,000 rupees 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 

210 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
CHAPTER XV.–OFFENCES RELATING TO RELIGION 
295 
Destroying, damaging or defiling a place of 
worship or sacred object with intent to insult 
the religion of any class of persons. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine or both. 
       Cognizable 
Non-Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
295A  
Maliciously insulting the religion or the 
religious beliefs of any class. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or   fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
296 
Causing a disturbance to an assembly engaged 
in religious worship. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or   fine, or both. 
Ditto 
 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
297 
Trespassing in place of worship or sepulcher, 
disturbing funeral with intention to wound the 
feelings or to insult the religion of any person, 
or offering indignity to a human corpse. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
298 
Uttering any word or making any sound in the 
hearing or making any gesture, or placing any 
object in the sight of any person, with intention 
to wound his religious feeling. 
Ditto 
 
       Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
CHAPTER XVI.–OFFENCES AFFECTING THE HUMAN BODY 
302 
Murder  
Death, or imprisonment for 
life, and fine. 
      Cognizable  
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
303 
Murder by a person under sentence of 
imprisonment for life. 
Death 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
304 
Culpable homicide not amounting to murder, 
if act by which the death is caused is done with 
intention of causing death, etc. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If act is done with knowledge that it is likely to 
cause death, but without any intention to cause 
death, etc. 
Imprisonment for 10 years, 
or fine, or both.   
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
304A 
Causing death by rash or negligent act. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
1[304B 
Dowry death.  
Imprisonment of not less 
than seven years           but 
which 
may 
extend 
to 
imprisonment for life. 
Ditto 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.] 
305 
Abetment of suicide committed by child, or 
insane or delirious person or an idiot, or a 
person intoxicated. 
Death, or imprisonment for 
life, or imprisonment for 
10 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
306 
Abetting the commission of suicide.  
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
307 
Attempt to murder 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If such act causes hurt to any person. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
Attempt by life-convict to murder, if hurt is 
caused. 
Death, or imprisonment for 
10 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
308 
Attempt to commit culpable homicide 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If such act causes hurt to any person 
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 11 (w.e.f. 19.11.1986). 

211 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
309 
Attempt to commit suicide.  
Simple imprisonment for 1 
year, or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
311 
Being a thug. 
Imprisonment for life and 
fine.  
Ditto 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
312 
Causing miscarriage. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
 
If the woman be quick with child. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
313 
Causing 
miscarriage 
without 
women’s 
consent. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
314 
Death caused by an act done with intent to 
cause miscarriage.  
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If act done without women’s consent.  
Imprisonment for life, or as 
above. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
315 
Act done with intent to prevent a child being 
born alive, or to cause it to die after its birth. 
Imprisonment for 10 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
316 
Causing death of a quick unborn child by an 
act amounting to culpable homicide. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
317 
Exposure of a child under 12 years of age by 
parent or person having care of it with 
intention of wholly abandoning it.  
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
318 
Concealment of birth by secret disposal of 
dead body. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
323 
Voluntarily causing hurt. 
Imprisonment for 1 year or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
 
Any 
Magistrate. 
324 
Voluntarily 
causing 
hurt 
by 
dangerous 
weapons or means. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
325 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
326 
Voluntarily 
causing 
grievous 
hurt 
by 
dangerous weapons or means. 
Imprisonment for life, or  
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Non-bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
1[326A 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of 
acid, etc. 
Imprisonment for not less 
than 10 years but which 
may 
extend 
to 
imprisonment for life and 
fine to be paid to the 
victim. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session 
326B 
Voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw 
acid. 
Imprisonment for 5 years 
but which may extend to 7 
years and with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.] 
327 
Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property or a 
valuable security, or to constrain to do 
anything which is illegal or which may 
facilitate the commission of an offence. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
328 
Administering stupefying drug with intent to 
cause hurt, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
329 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort 
property or a valuable security, or to constrain 
to do anything which is illegal, or which may 
facilitate the commission of an offence. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
330 
Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession 
or information, or to compel restoration of 
property, etc. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
 
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
331 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort 
confession or information, or to compel 
restoration of  property, etc. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
332 
Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public 
servant from his duty. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
or fine or both. 
Ditto 
 
 2[Ditto] 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
333 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter 
public servant from his duty. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
3[Ditto] 
Court 
of 
Session. 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42(f)(v), occurring in column 5, relating to s. 332, for  “Bailable” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  
3. Subs. by  s. 42(f)(vi), ibid., occurring in column 5, relating to s. 333, for “Non-bailable”, (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  

212 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
334 
Voluntarily causing hurt on grave and sudden 
provocation, not intending to hurt any other than the 
person who gave the provocation. 
Imprisonment for 1 month, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
335 
Causing grievous hurt on grave and sudden 
provocation, not intending to hurt any other than the 
person who gave the provocation. 
Imprisonment for 4 years, or 
fine of 2,000 rupees, or both. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the 
first class. 
336 
Doing any act which endangers human life or the 
personal safety of others. 
Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 250 rupees, or both.  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
337 
Causing hurt by an act which endangers human life, 
etc. 
Imprisonment for 6 months, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
338 
Causing grievous hurt by an act which endangers 
human life, etc. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
341 
Wrongfully restraining any person. 
Simple imprisonment for 1 
month, or fine of 500 rupees, 
or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
342 
Wrongfully confining any person. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
343 
Wrongfully confining for three or more days. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
344 
Wrongfully confining for 10 or more days. 
Imprisonment for 3 years and 
fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
345 
Keeping any person in wrongful confinement, 
knowing that a writ has been issued for his liberation. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, in 
addition 
to 
imprisonment 
under any other section. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the 
first class. 
346 
Wrongful confinement in secret. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
347 
Wrongful confinement for the purpose of extorting 
property, or constraining to an illegal act, etc. 
Imprisonment for 3 years and 
fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
348 
Wrongful confinement for the purpose of extorting 
confession 
or 
information, 
or 
of 
compelling 
restoration of property, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
352 
Assault or use of criminal force otherwise than on 
grave provocation. 
Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 500 rupees, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
353 
Assault or use of criminal force to deter a public 
servant from discharge of his duty. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
1[Non-bailable] 
Ditto. 
2[354 
Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent 
to outrage her modesty. 
Imprisonment of 1 year which 
may extend to 5 years, and 
with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Any 
Magistrate 
354A 
Sexual harassment of the nature of unwelcome 
physical contact and advances or a demand or request 
for sexual favours, showing pornography. 
Imprisonment 
which 
may 
extend to 3 years or with fine 
or with both. 
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate 
 
Sexual harassment of the nature of making sexually 
coloured remark. 
Imprisonment 
which 
may 
extend to 1 year or with fine or 
with both. 
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
354B 
Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent 
to disrobe. 
Imprisonment of not less than 
3 years but which may extend 
to 7 years and with fine. 
Cognizable  
Non-bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
354C 
Voyeurism. 
Imprisonment of not less than 
1 year but which may extend to 
3 years and with fine for first 
conviction. 
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
 
 
Imprisonment of not less than 
3 years but which may extend 
7 years and with fine for 
second 
or 
subsequent 
conviction. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Any 
Magistrate 
354D 
Stalking. 
Imprisonment up to 3 years 
and 
with 
fine 
for 
first 
conviction. 
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
 
 
Imprisonment up to 5 years 
and with fine for second or 
subsequent conviction. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Any 
Magistrate.] 
355 
Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonor a 
person, otherwise than on grave and sudden 
provocation. 
Ditto 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
356 
Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft 
of property worn or carried by a person. 
Ditto 
 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
357 
Assault or use of criminal force in attempt 
wrongfully to confine a person. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, or 
fine of 1,000 rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
358 
Assault or use of criminal force on grave and sudden 
provocation. 
Simple imprisonment for one 
month, or fine of 200 rupees, 
or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
363 
Kidnapping  
Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. 
Cognizable 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the 
first class. 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 42 (f) (vii), occurring in column 5, relating to s. 353, for “Ditto” (w.e.f. 23-6-2006). 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entry relating to s. 354 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  

213 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
363A 
Kidnapping or obtaining the custody of a 
minor in order that such minor may be 
employed or used for purposes of begging. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Cognizable 
 
Non-bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
 
Maiming a minor in order that such minor may 
be employed or used for purposes of begging. 
Imprisonment for life and 
fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
364 
Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
1[364A 
Kidnapping for ransom, etc. 
Death, or imprisonment for 
life and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto.] 
365 
Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly 
and wrongfully to confine a person. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
366 
Kidnapping or abducting a woman to compel 
her marriage or to cause her defilement, etc. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
366A 
Procuration of a minor girl. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
366B 
Importation of a girl from foreign country. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
367 
Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject a 
person to grievous hurt, slavery, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
368 
Concealing or keeping in confinement a 
kidnapped person. 
Punishment for kidnapping 
or abduction. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court by 
which the 
kidnapping 
or abduction 
is triable. 
369 
Kidnapping or abducting a child with intent to 
take property from the person of such child. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
2[370 
Trafficking of person. 
Imprisonment of not less 
than 7 years but which may 
extend to 10 years and with 
fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 
Trafficking of more than one person. 
Imprisonment of not less 
than 10 years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for 
life and with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 
Trafficking of a minor. 
Imprisonment of not less 
than 10 years but which may 
extend to imprisonment for 
life and with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 
Trafficking of more than one minor. 
Imprisonment of not less than 14 
years but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and with 
fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 
Person convicted of offence of trafficking of minor 
on more than one occasion. 
Imprisonment for life which 
shall mean the remainder of that 
person’s natural life and with 
fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 
Public servant or a police officer involved in 
trafficking of minor. 
Imprisonment for life which 
shall mean the remainder of 
that person’s natural life and 
with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
370A 
Exploitation of a trafficked child. 
Imprisonment of not less than 5 
years but which may extend to 7 
years and with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 
Exploitation of a trafficked person. 
Imprisonment of not less 
than 3 years but which may 
extend to 5 years and with 
fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.] 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 4, (w.e.f. 22-5-1993). 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entries relating to s. 370 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013).  

214 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
371 
Habitual dealing in slaves. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for  10 
years and fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
372 
Selling or letting to hire a minor for 
purposes of prostitution, etc. 
Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
373 
Buying or obtaining possession of a 
minor for the same purposes. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
374 
Unlawful compulsory labour. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
1[ 2[376 Rape.  
Rigorous imprisonment of 
not less than 10 years but 
which may extend to 
imprisonment for life and 
with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 
Rape by a police officer or a public 
servant or member of armed forces or a 
person being on the management or on 
the staff of a jail, remand home or other 
place 
of 
custody 
or 
women’s 
or 
children’s institution or by a person on 
the management or on the staff of a 
hospital, and rape committed by a person 
in a position of trust or authority towards 
the person raped or by a near relative of 
the person raped. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
of not less than 10 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life 
which shall mean the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
 
Persons committing offence of rape on a 
woman under sixteen years of age. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which shall not 
be less than 20 years but 
which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life and  
with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.] 
376A 
Person committing an offence of rape and 
inflicting injury which causes death or 
causes the woman to be in a persistent 
vegetative state. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
of not less than 20 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life or 
with death. 
Cognizable 
 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
3[376AB Person committing an offence of rape on 
a woman under twelve years of age. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
of not less than 20 years 
but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine or with death. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.] 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24, for entries relating to ss. 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 24, for entry 376 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
3. Ins. by s. 24, ibid.  (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 

215 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
376B 
Sexual intercourse by husband upon his 
wife during separation. 
Imprisonment for not less 
than 2 years but which 
may extend to 7 years 
and with fine. 
Cognizable 
 
Bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
376C 
Sexual intercourse by a person in 
authority. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 5 years 
but which may extend 
to 10 years and with 
fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
376D 
Gang rape 
Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 20 
years but which may 
extend to imprisonment 
for life which shall 
mean imprisonment for 
the remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine to be paid to 
the victim. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
1[376DA Gang rape on a woman under sixteen 
years of age. 
Imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session. 
376DB 
Gang rape on woman under twelve years 
of age. 
Imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that 
person’s natural life and 
with fine or with death. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.] 
376E 
Repeat offenders. 
Imprisonment for life 
which shall mean 
imprisonment for the 
remainder of that person’s 
natural life or with death. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.] 
2[377 
Unnatural offences 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class.] 
CHAPTER XVII.–OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY 
379 
Theft  
Imprisonment for 3 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
380 
Theft in a building, tent or vessel 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
381 
Theft by clerk or servant of property in 
possession of master or employer. 
Ditto 
 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
382 
Theft, after preparation having been 
made for causing death, or hurt, or 
restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of 
restraint, in order to the committing of 
such theft, or to retiring after committing 
it, or to retaining  property taken by it. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 24 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
2.  Subs. by Act 30 of 2001, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for  the entries relating to s. 377 (w.e.f. 3-9-2001). 

216 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
384 
Extortion  
Imprisonment 
for 
3 
years, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
385 
Putting or attempting to put in fear of 
injury, in order to commit extortion. 
Imprisonment 
for 
2 
years, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
 
   Bailable  
Ditto. 
 
386 
Extortion by putting a person in fear of 
death or grievous hurt. 
Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
 
Non-bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
387 
Putting or attempting to put a person in 
fear of death or grievous hurt in order to 
commit extortion. 
Imprisonment 
for 
7 
years and fine. 
           Ditto 
 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
388 
Extortion by threat of accusation of an 
offence 
punishable 
with 
death, 
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years. 
Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
     Bailable  
Ditto. 
 
If the offence threatened be an unnatural 
offence. 
Imprisonment for life  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
389 
Putting a person in fear of accusation of 
an 
offence 
punishable 
with 
death, 
imprisonment for life, or imprisonment 
for 10 years in order to commit extortion. 
Imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If the offence be an unnatural offence. 
Imprisonment for life. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
392 
Robbery  
Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine. 
Ditto 
 
    Non-bailable  
Ditto. 
 
 
If committed on the highway between 
sunset and sunrise. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
for 14 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
393 
Attempt to commit robbery. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
for 7 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
394 
Person 
voluntarily 
causing 
hurt 
in 
committing or attempting to commit 
robbery, or any other person jointly 
concerned in such robbery. 
Imprisonment for life, 
or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
395 
Dacoity  
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
396 
Murder in dacoity 
Death, 
imprisonment 
for life, or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
397 
Robbery or dacoity, with attempt to cause 
death or grievous hurt. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
for not less than 7 
years. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
398 
Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity 
when armed with deadly weapon. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
399 
Making preparation to commit dacoity.  
Rigorous imprisonment 
for 10 years and fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.  
400 
Belonging 
to 
a 
gang 
of 
persons 
associated for the purpose of habitually 
committing dacoity.  
Imprisonment for life, 
or rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
401 
Belonging to a wandering gang of 
persons associated for the purpose of 
habitually committing thefts. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
for 7 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
402 
Being one of five or more persons 
assembled for the purpose of committing 
dacoity. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court 
of 
Session. 

217 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
403 
Dishonest misappropriation of movable 
property, or converting it to one’s own 
use. 
Imprisonment 
for 
2 
years, or fine, or both. 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
404 
Dishonest misappropriation of property, 
knowing that it was in possession of a 
deceased person at his death, and that it 
has not since been in the possession of 
any person legally entitled to it. 
Imprisonment 
for 
3 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class.. 
 
If by clerk or person employed by 
deceased 
Imprisonment 
for 
7 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
406 
Criminal breach of trust 
Imprisonment 
for 
3 
years, or  fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Ditto. 
 
407 
Criminal breach of trust by a carrier, 
wharfinger, etc. 
Imprisonment 
for 
7 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
408 
Criminal breach of trust by a clerk or 
servant. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
409 
Criminal breach of trust by public servant 
or by banker, merchant or agent, etc. 
Imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
411 
Dishonestly receiving stolen property 
knowing it to be stolen. 
Imprisonment 
for 
3 
years, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
412 
Dishonestly receiving stolen property, 
knowing that it was obtained by dacoity. 
Imprisonment for life, 
or 
rigorous 
imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
413 
Habitually dealing in stolen property. 
Imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment for 10 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
414 
Assisting in concealment or disposal of 
stolen property, knowing it to be stolen. 
Imprisonment 
for 
3 
years, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
417 
Cheating  
Imprisonment 
for 
1 
year, or fine, or both. 
    Non-cognizable  
      Bailable  
Ditto. 
 
418 
Cheating a person whose interest the 
offender was bound, either by law or by 
legal contract, to protect. 
Imprisonment 
for 
3 
years, or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
419 
Cheating by personation . 
Ditto 
 
       Cognizable  
Ditto 
Ditto. 
420 
Cheating 
and 
thereby 
dishonestly 
inducing delivery of property, or the 
making, alteration or destruction of a 
valuable security. 
Imprisonment 
for 
7 
years and fine. 
Ditto 
Non-bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
421 
Fraudulent removal or concealment of 
property, etc., to prevent distribution 
among creditors. 
Imprisonment 
for 
2 
years, or fine, or both. 
     Non-cognizable  
 Bailable  
Any 
Magistrate. 
422 
Fraudulently preventing from being made 
available for his creditors a debt or demand 
due to the offender. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
     Non-cognizable  
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
423 
Fraudulent execution of deed of transfer 
containing a false statement of consideration. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
424 
Fraudulent 
removal 
or 
concealment 
of 
property, of himself or any other person or 
assisting in the doing thereof, or dishonestly 
releasing any demand or claim to which he is 
entitled. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 

218 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
426 
Mischief 
Imprisonment for 3 
months or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
427 
Mischief, and thereby causing damage to the 
amount of 50 rupees or upwards. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
428 
Mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or 
rendering useless any animal of the value of 10 
rupees or upwards. 
Ditto 
       Cognizable  
Ditto 
Ditto. 
429 
Mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or 
rendering useless any elephant, camel, horse, 
etc., whatever may be its value, or any other 
animal of the value of 50 rupees or upwards. 
Imprisonment for 5 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
430 
Mischief by causing diminution of supply of 
water for agricultural purposes, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
431 
Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, 
navigable river, or navigable channel, and 
rendering it impassable or less safe for 
travelling or conveying property. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
432 
Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction 
to public drainage attended with damage. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
433 
Mischief by destroying or moving or rendering 
less useful a lighthouse or seamark, or by 
exhibiting false lights. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
434 
Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a 
landmark fixed by public authority. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine, or both. 
        Non-cognizable 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
435 
Mischief by fire or explosive substance with 
intent to cause damage to an amount of 100 
rupees or upwards, or, in case of agricultural 
produce, 10 rupees or upwards. 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
        Cognizable  
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
436 
Mischief by fire or explosive substance with 
intent to destroy a house, etc. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
        Non-bailable  
Court of 
Session. 
437 
Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe 
a decked vessel or a vessel of 20 tonnes 
burden. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
438 
The mischief described in the last section 
when committed by fire or any explosive 
substance. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
439 
Running vessel ashore with intent to commit 
theft, etc. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
440 
Mischief committed after preparation made for 
causing death, or hurt, etc. 
Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
      Bailable  
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
447 
Criminal trespass 
Imprisonment 
for 
3 
months, or fine of 500 
rupees, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
448 
House-trespass 
Imprisonment for 1 year, 
or fine of 1,000 rupees, or 
both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 

 
219 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
449 
House-trespass in order to the commission of 
an offence punishable with death. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
rigorous imprisonment for 
10 years and fine. 
 Cognizable  
     Non-bailable  
Court of 
Session. 
450 
House-trespass in order to the commission of 
an offence punishable with imprisonment for 
life. 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
451 
House-trespass in order to the commission of 
an offence punishable with imprisonment. 
Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
 
If the offence is theft 
Imprisonment for 7 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
    Non-bailable  
Ditto. 
452 
House-trespass, having made preparation for 
causing hurt, assault, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
453 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking. 
Imprisonment for 2 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
454 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in 
order to the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
If the offence be theft 
Imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
455 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after 
preparation made for causing hurt, assault, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
456 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by 
night. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
457 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by 
night in order to the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment. 
Imprisonment for 5 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
 
If the offence is theft 
Imprisonment for 14 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
458 
Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by 
night, after preparation made for causing hurt, 
etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
459 
Grievous hurt caused whilst committing 
lurking house-trespass or house-breaking. 
Imprisonment for life, or 
imprisonment for 10 years 
and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
460 
Death or grievous hurt caused by one of 
several persons jointly concerned in house-
breaking by night, etc. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
461 
Dishonestly breaking open or unfastening any 
closed receptacle containing or supposed to 
contain property. 
Imprisonment for 2  years 
or fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
462 
Being entrusted with any closed receptacle 
containing or supposed to contain any 
property, and fraudulently opening the same. 
Imprisonment for 3 years 
or fine, or both. 
       Ditto 
        Bailable  
Ditto 
CHAPTER XVIII.—OFFENCES RFLATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS 
465 
Forgery 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both.  
   Non-cognizable 
       Bailable  
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
466 
Forgery of a record of a Court of 
Justice or of a Registrar of Births, etc., 
kept by a public servant. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and fine  
Ditto 
    Non-bailable  
Ditto. 
467 
Forgery of a valuable security, will, or 
authority to make or transfer any 
valuable security, or to receive any 
money, etc. 
Imprisonment 
for 
life, 
or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
When the valuable security is a 
promissory 
note 
of 
the 
Central 
Government. 
Ditto 
        Cognizable  
Ditto 
Ditto. 

 
220 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
468 
Forgery for the purpose of cheating. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. 
Cognizable  
 Non-bailable  
Magistrate of 
the 
first 
class.  
469 
Forgery for the purpose of harming the 
reputation of any person or knowing 
that it is likely to be used for that 
purpose. 
Imprisonment for 3 years and fine. 
Ditto 
     Bailable  
Ditto. 
471 
Using as genuine a forged document 
which is known to be forged. 
Punishment for forgery of such 
document. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
When the forged document is a 
promissory 
note 
of 
the 
Central 
Government. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
472 
Making or counterfeiting a seal, plate, 
etc., with intent to commit a forgery 
punishable under section 467 of the 
Indian Penal Code, or possessing with 
like intent any such seal, plate, etc., 
knowing the same to be counterfeit. 
Imprisonment 
for 
life, 
or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
473 
Making or counterfeiting a seal, plate, 
etc., with intent to commit a forgery 
punishable otherwise than under section 
467 of the Indian Penal Code, or 
possessing with like intent any such 
seal, plate, etc., knowing the same to be 
counterfeit. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
474 
Having possession of a document, 
knowing it to be forged, with intent to 
use it as genuine; if the document is one 
of the description mentioned in section 
466 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
 
If the document is one of the 
description mentioned in section 467 of 
the Indian Penal Code. 
Imprisonment 
for 
life, 
or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine. 
   Non-cognizable  
Ditto 
Ditto. 
475 
Counterfeiting a device or mark used 
for authenticating documents described 
in section 467 of the Indian Penal Code, 
or 
possessing 
counterfeit 
marked 
material. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
476 
Counterfeiting a device or mark used 
for authenticating documents other than 
those described in section 467 of the 
Indian Penal Code, or possessing 
counterfeit marked material. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and fine. 
Ditto 
     Non-bailable  
Ditto. 
477 
Fraudulently destroying or defacing, or 
attempting to destroy or deface, or 
secreting, a will, etc. 
Imprisonment 
for 
life, 
or 
imprisonment for 7 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
477A 
Falsification of accounts. 
Imprisonment for 7 years or fine, 
or both. 
Ditto 
      Bailable  
Ditto. 
482 
Using a false property mark with intent 
to deceive or injure any person. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
       Any 
Magistrate. 
483 
Counterfeiting a property mark used by 
another, with intent to cause damage or 
injury. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
484 
Counterfeiting a property mark used by 
a public servant, or any mark used by 
him to denote the manufacture, quality, 
etc., of any property. 
Imprisonment for 3 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the 
first 
class.  
485 
Fraudulently 
making 
or 
having 
possession of any die, plate or other 
instrument for counterfeiting any 
public or private property mark. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 
Ditto. 

221 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
486 
Knowingly selling goods marked 
with a counterfeit property mark. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both. 
Non-cognizable  
Bailable  
 
Any 
Magistrate. 
487 
Fraudulently making a false mark 
upon any package or receptacle 
containing goods, with intent to 
cause it to be believed that it contains 
goods, which it does not contain, etc. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
488 
Making use of any such false mark. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
489 
Removing, destroying or defacing 
property mark with intent to cause 
injury. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
489A Counterfeiting 
currency-notes 
or 
bank-notes. 
Imprisonment 
for 
life, 
or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
        Cognizable  
Non-bailable  
Court 
of 
Session. 
489B Using 
as 
genuine 
forged 
or 
counterfeit currency-notes or bank-
notes. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
489C Possession of forged or counterfeit 
currency-notes or bank-notes. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
         Bailable  
Ditto. 
489D Making or possessing machinery, 
instrument or material for forging or 
counterfeiting 
currency-notes 
or 
bank-notes. 
Imprisonment 
for 
life, 
or 
imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Ditto 
       Non-bailable  
Ditto. 
489E 
Making 
or 
using 
documents 
resembling currency-notes or bank-
notes. 
Fine of 100 rupees. 
     Non-cognizable  
        Bailable  
Any 
Magistrate. 
 
On refusal to disclose the name and 
address of the printer. 
Fine of 200 rupees. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
CHAPTER XIX.—CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE 
491  Being bound to attend on or supply the 
wants of a person who is helpless from 
youth, 
unsoundness 
of 
mind 
or 
disease, and voluntarily omitting to do 
so. 
Imprisonment for 3 months, or 
fine of 200 rupees, or both. 
       Non-cognizable  
       Bailable  
Any 
Magistrate. 
CHAPTER XX.—OFFENCES RELATING TO MARRIAGE 
493 
A man by deceit causing a woman not 
lawfully married to him to believe, 
that she is lawfully married to him  
and to cohabit with him in that belief. 
Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
       Non-cognizable  
      Non-bailable  
Magistrate 
of the first 
class. 
494 
Marrying again during the life time of 
a husband or wife. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. 
Ditto 
     Bailable  
Ditto. 
495 
Same offence with concealment of the 
former marriage from the person with 
whom 
subsequent 
marriage 
is 
contracted. 
Imprisonment for 10 years and 
fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
496 
A person with fraudulent intention 
going through the ceremony of being 
married, knowing that he is not 
thereby lawfully married. 
Imprisonment for 7 years and 
fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
497 
Adultery  
Imprisonment for 5 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
498 
Enticing or taking away or detaining 
with a criminal intent a married 
woman. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or 
fine, or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 

222 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
1[CHAPTER XXA.—OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND 
498A 
Punishment for subjecting a married 
woman to cruelty. 
Imprisonment for three years and 
fine. 
Cognizable 
if 
information relating 
to the commission of 
the offence is given 
to an officer  in 
charge of a police 
station by the person 
aggrieved 
by 
the 
offence or by any 
person related to her 
by blood, marriage  
or adoption or if there 
is no such relative, by 
any public servant 
belonging 
to 
such 
class or category as 
may be notified by 
the State Government 
in this behalf. 
  Non-bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class.] 
CHAPTER XXI.—DEFAMATION 
500 
Defamation against the President or the 
Vice-President or the Governor of a 
State or Administrator of a Union 
territory or a Minister in respect of his 
conduct in the discharge of his public 
functions when instituted upon a 
complaint 
made 
by 
the 
Public 
Prosecutor. 
Simple imprisonment for 2 years, 
or fine, or both. 
     Non-cognizable  
          Bailable  
Court of 
Session. 
 
Defamation in any other case 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
501(a) Printing or engraving matter knowing 
it to be defamatory against the 
President or the Vice-President or the 
Governor of a State or Administrator 
of a Union territory or a Minister in 
respect of his conduct in the discharge 
of his public functions when instituted 
upon a complaint made by the Public 
Prosecutor. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
     (b) Printing or engraving matter knowing 
it to be defamatory, in any other case. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
502(a) Sale of printed or engraved substance 
containing 
defamatory 
matter, 
knowing it to  contain such matter 
against the President or the Vice-
President or the Governor of a State or 
Administrator of a Union territory or a 
Minister in respect of his conduct in 
the discharge of his public functions 
when instituted upon a complaint 
made by the Public Prosecutor. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Court of 
Session. 
     (b) Sale of printed or engraved substance 
containing 
defamatory 
matter, 
knowing it to contain such matter in 
any other case. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
                                                 
1.  Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 6 (w.e.f. 25-12-1983). 

223 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
CHAPTER XXII.—CRIMINAL INTIMIDATIONS, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE 
504 
Insult intended to provoke breach of the 
peace. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both. 
    Non-cognizable 
       Bailable  
Any 
Magistrate. 
505 
False statement, rumour, etc., circulated 
with intent to cause mutiny or offence 
against the public peace. 
Imprisonment for 3 years, or fine, 
or both. 
Ditto 
      Non-bailable 
Ditto. 
 
False statement, rumour, etc., with 
intent to create enmity, hatred or ill- 
will between different classes. 
Ditto 
      Cognizable  
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
False statement, rumour, etc., made in 
place of worship, etc., with intent to 
create enmity, hatred or ill-will. 
Imprisonment for 5 years and fine. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
506 
Criminal intimidation. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, or fine, 
or both. 
     Non-cognizable  
     Bailable  
Ditto. 
 
If threat be to cause death or grievous 
hurt, etc. 
Imprisonment for 7 years, or fine, 
or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of 
the first 
class. 
507 
Criminal intimidation by anonymous 
communication 
or 
having 
taken 
precaution to conceal whence the threat 
comes. 
Imprisonment for 2 years, in 
addition to the punishment under 
above section. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
508 
Act caused by inducing a person to 
believe that he will be rendered an 
object of Divine displeasure. 
Imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, 
or both. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Any 
Magistrate. 
509 
Uttering any word or making any 
gesture intended to insult the modesty 
of a woman, etc. 
1[Simple imprisonment for 3 years 
and with fine.] 
       Cognizable   
Ditto 
Ditto. 
510 
Appearing in a public place, etc., in a 
state of intoxication, and causing 
annoyance to any person. 
Simple imprisonment for 24 hours, 
or fine of 10 rupees, or both. 
      Non-cognizable   
Ditto 
Ditto. 
CHAPTER XXIII.—ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES 
511 
Attempting 
to 
commit 
offences 
punishable with imprisonment for life, 
or imprisonment, and in such attempt 
doing any act towards the commission 
of the offence. 
Imprisonment 
for 
life, 
or 
imprisonment 
not 
exceeding 
half.of the longest term, provided 
for the offence, or fine, or both 
According 
as 
the 
offence is cognizable 
or non-cognizable. 
According as the 
offence attempted 
by the offender is 
bailable or not. 
The court by 
which 
the 
offence 
attempted is 
triable. 
 
II.—CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES AGAINST OTHER LAWS 
 
Offence 
Cognizable 
or non-
cognizable 
Bailable or non-
bailable 
By what court triable 
If punishable with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for more than 7 years Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of Session. 
If punishable with  imprisonment for 3 years and upwards but not  more than 7 years 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Magistrate of the first 
class. 
If punishable with  imprisonment for less than 3 years or with fine only. 
Non-
cognizable 
Bailable 
Any Magistrate. 
 
 
 
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 24, for the word “Simple imprisonment for 1 year, or fine, or both,” occurring made in column 3, 
relating to s. 509 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 

224 
 
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Chhattisgarh 
In First Schedule to the Code, under the heading “1. —OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE, 1860” 
— 
(a) In the entries relating to Section 211, the following entries shall be added, namely: — 
 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
non-cognizable 
Bailable or 
non-
bailable 
By what Court 
triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
... 
If offence charged be punishable under Ss. 
354, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D, 354E, 376B, 
376C, 376F, 509, 509A or 509B. 
Imprisonment not less than 
3 years but which may 
extend to 5 years and fine. 
Non-Cognizable 
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
(b) In the entries relating to Section 354, the following entries shall be added, namely: — 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
non-cognizable 
Bailable 
or non-
bailable 
By what 
Court triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
... 
If committed by relative of the woman. 
Imprisonment not less 
than 2 years but which 
may extend to 7 years 
and fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
the first class. 
 (C) After the entries relating to Section 354D, the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
non-cognizable 
Bailable 
or non-
bailable 
By what 
Court triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
354E 
Liability of person present who fails to 
prevent the commission of offence under 
Ss. 354, 354A, 354B, 354C or 354D. 
 
Imprisonment upto 3 
years or fine or both. 
Cognizable 
Bailable 
Any 
Magistrate. 
(d) After the entries relating of Section 376E, the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
non-cognizable 
Bailable 
or non-
bailable 
By what 
Court triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
376F 
Liability of person in-charge of any work 
Imprisonment upto 3 
Cognizable 
Non-
Magistrate of 

225 
 
place and others to give information 
about offence. 
years and fine. 
Bailable 
first class. 
 
(e) After the entries relating to Section 509, the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
non-cognizable 
Bailable 
or non-
bailable 
By what 
Court triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
509A 
Sexual harassment by relative. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
not less than 1 year but 
which may extend upto 
5 years and fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
first class. 
509B 
Sexual harassment by electronic modes. 
Rigorous imprisonment 
not less than 6 months 
but which may extend 
upto 2 years and fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-
Bailable 
Magistrate of 
first class,] 
 
[Vide Chhattisgarh Act 25 of 2015, s. 13] 
 
 
Gujarat 
In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, in the First Schedule, in the table, under the heading “Chapter XVII-Offences against 
Property”, after section 379, the following shall be inserted, namely: — 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable or Non-
bailable 
By what court 
triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
“379A 
Attempt to commit 
snatching 
Rigorous 
imprisonment of not 
less than five years 
but which may 
extend to ten years, 
and fine of 25,000 
rupees. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of Session 
 
Committing 
snatching 
Rigorous 
imprisonment of not 
less than seven years 
but which may 
extend to ten years, 
and fine of 25,000 
rupees. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 
 
Causing hurt or 
wrongful restraint or 
fear of hurt, in order 
to effect escape after 
attempting to commit 
or after committing 
snatching 
Rigorous 
imprisonment which 
may extend to three 
years, in addition to 
punishment under 
other sub-sections. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto. 

226 
 
379B 
Snatching, after 
preparation having 
been made for 
causing death, or 
hurt, or restraint, in 
order to the 
committing of such 
snatching, or to 
retaining property 
taken by it. 
Rigorous 
imprisonment f not 
less than seven years 
but which may 
extend to ten year, 
and fine of 25,000 
rupees. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto.”. 
 
[Vide Gujrat Act 6 of 2019, s. 3.] 
Madhya Pradesh 
Amendment of First Schedule.- In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the heading “I-
OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, after the entries relating to section 354, the 
following entries shall be inserted, namely:- 
 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable or Non-
bailable 
By what court 
triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
“354-A 
Assault or use of 
Criminal force to 
woman with intent 
to disrobe her. 
Imprisonment of 
not less than one 
year but which 
may extend to ten 
years and fine. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of Session” 
 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 2004, s. 5.] 
 
Madhya Pradesh 
Amendment of the First Schedule.—In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the heading               
“I-Offences under the Indian Penal Code”, in column 6 against section 317, 318, 326, 363, 363A, 365, 
377, 392, 393, 394, 409, 435, 466, 467, 468, 471, 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477 and 477A, for the words, 
“Magistrate of the first class”, wherever they occur, the  words “Court of Session” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 2008, s. 4.] 
Maharashtra  
In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, under heading “I,- OFFENCES UNDER 
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”,-  
(i) for the entry relating to section 332, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
Non-cognizable 
Bailable or 
Non-bailable 
By what court 
triable 

227 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
“332 
Voluntarily 
causing hurt to 
deter public 
servant from his 
duty. 
Imprisonment 
for 5 years or 
fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Non- bailable 
Court of 
Session.”; 
(ii) for the entry relating to section 353, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— 
Section 
Offence 
Punishment 
Cognizable or 
Non-
cognizable 
Bailable or 
Non-bailable 
By what court 
triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
“353 
Assault or use of 
criminal force to 
deter a public servant 
from discharge of his 
duty. 
Imprisonment 
for five years, 
or fine, or both. 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court of 
Session.”. 
[Vide Maharashtra Act 40 of 2018, s. 5.] 
Haryana  
1. 
This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure (Haryana Amendment) Act, 2014. 
 
Short title 
2. 
In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in its application to the State of Haryana, in the 
First Schedule, in the table, after section 379, the following entries shall be inserted, 
namely:—   
Amendment 
of First 
Schedule to 
Central Act 2 
of 1974 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
 
 
“379-A 
Snatching 
Rigorous 
imprisonment for a 
term which shall 
not be less than 
five years but 
which may extend 
to ten years, and 
fine of Rs. 
25,000/- 
Cognizable 
Non-
bailable 
 
Court of 
Session 
 
 
 
379-B 
Snatching 
with hurt or 
wrongful 
restraint or 
fear of hurt. 
Rigorous 
imprisonment for a 
term which shall 
not be less than ten 
years and which 
may extend to 
fourteen years, and 
           
Ditto 
 
              
Ditto 
       
Ditto”. 
 

228 
 
fine of Rs. 
25,000/- 
 
[Vide Notification No. GSR929(E) dated 16th December, 2019.] 
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Central Act No. 2 of 1974.—In the First Schedule to the  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
under the heading “1. OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE” after the entries relating to section 304-
A, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:— 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
“304-AA 
Causing death or 
injury by driving 
a public service 
vehicle while in 
a state of 
intoxication  
Imprisonment 
for life, or 
imprisonment 
for seven years 
and fine  
Ditto  
Non-bailable  
Court of  
Session” 
[Vide Himachal Pradesh 19 of 1997, s. 3.] 
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Central Act No. 2 of 1974. — In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 
under the heading “I, OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, after the entries relating to section 289, 
the following entries shall be inserted, namely:— 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
“289-A 
Whoever throws eatables in 
public place, other than 
those notified by the State 
Government in the Official 
Gazette, and thereby entice 
monkeys to assemble at 
such place for taking 
eatables which result in 
causing danger to human 
life or to be likely to cause 
injury or annoyance to the 
public or to the people in 
general or to cause 
hindrance in smooth 
running of vehicular traffic. 
Imprisonment for 
one month or fine 
of Rs. 1000/- or 
both 
Ditto 
Ditto 
 
Ditto. 
 
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 2006, s. 3.] 

229 
 
Himachal Pradesh  
Amendment of Central Act No. 2 of 1947. —In the First Schedule to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, under the heading “ OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”, in its application to the  State of 
Himachal Pradesh, against the entries relating to section 304-AA, under column 2, for the words “a public service 
vehicle”, the words “any vehicle” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Himachal Pradesh Act 7 of 2012, s. 3.]  
STATE AMENDMENTS 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh (UTs).— 
1  
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
354E  
Sextortion 
Imprisonment of 
not 
less than 3 years 
but 
which may 
extend to 
five years and 
with 
fine. 
Cognizable  
 
Non-bailable 
Magistrate 
of the First 
Class 
[vide the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization (Adaptation of Central Laws) Order, 2020, vide 
notification No. S.O. 1123(E) dated (18-3-2020).] 
Orissa 
Amendment of First Schedule.—In the First Schedule to the said Code, in the entry under  column 5 
relating to section  354 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860) for the word “Bailable” the word 
“non-bailable” shall be substituted. 
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 1995, s. 3] 
Amendment of First Schedule.— In the first Schedule to the principal Act, for the existing entries relating to 
sections 272, 273,274, 275 and 276, the following entries shall respectively be substituted ,  namely:— 
 
Section  
              
Offence   
Punishment 
Cognizable 
or 
non-cognizable     
Bailable  non-
bailable            
or                 
By what Court 
triable 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
272.          
                 
            
Adulterating  food or drink 
intended         For sale, or as 
to 
make 
the 
same   
noxious. 
Imprisonment for  
life and fine.       
Cognizable    
Non-bailable        
Court 
of 
Session. 
273. 
Selling any food or drink as 
food and drink, knowing the 
same to be noxious. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
274. 
Adulterating any drug or 
medical 
Preparation 
intended for sale so as to 
Lessen its efficacy, or to 
change its Operation, or to 
make it noxious. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 

230 
 
 
275. 
Offering for sale or 
issuing 
from 
a 
dispensary and drug or 
medical 
preparation 
known to have been 
adulterated. 
Imprisonment 
for life and fine 
Cognizable 
Non-bailable 
Court 
for 
session. 
276.  
knowingly selling or 
issuing 
from 
A 
dispensary and drug or 
medical Preparation as 
a different drug or 
medical preparation. 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
Ditto 
[Vide Orissa Act 6 of 2004, s. 3] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

231 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 476) 
FORM No. 1 
SUMMONS TO AN ACCUSED PERSON 
(See section 61) 
To      (name of accused) of (address) 
 
WHEREAS your attendance is necessary to answer to a charge of                                                 (state 
shortly the offence charged), you are hereby required to appear in person (or by pleader, as the case may 
be) before the (Magistrate) of                      , on the               day                         . Herein fail not. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
________________ 
 
FORM No. 2 
WARRRANT OF ARREST 
(See section 70) 
To      (name and designation of the person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant). 
WHEREAS (name of accused) of (address) stands charged with the offence of             (state the 
offence), you are hereby directed to arrest the said                                                  , and to produce 
him before me. Herein fail not. 
 
Dated, this 
day of      
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
 
(See section 71) 
This warrant may be endorsed as follows:— 
 
If the said                                                                                      shall give bail himself in the sum 
of rupees                                                      with one surety in the sum of rupees                               (or two 
sureties each in the sum of rupees                 ) to attend before me on the                   day of                  and 
to continue so to attend until otherwise directed by me, he may be released. 
 
Dated, this                     
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
 (Signature) 
________________ 

232 
FORM No. 3 
BOND AND BAIL-BOND AFTER ARREST UNDER A WARRANT 
(See section 81) 
I,                                            (name), of                                                              ,being brought before 
the District Magistrate of                                                                 (or as the case may be) under a warrant 
issued to compel my appearance to answer to the charge of                               , do hereby bind myself to 
attend in the Court of                                       on the                 day of                   next, to answer to the 
said charge, and to continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the Court; and, in case of my making 
default herein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees         
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
 
(Signature) 
 
I do hereby declare myself surety for the above-named                              of                                that 
he shall attend before                                                                                                        in the Court of on 
the                                    day of                                                      next, to answer to the charge on which 
he has been arrested, and shall continue so to attend until otherwise directed by the Court; and, in case of 
his making default therein, I bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum of rupees 
 
Dated, this 
day of  
,19     . 
 
 
(Signature)    
      ________________ 
 
FORM No. 4 
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED 
(See section 82) 
WHEREAS a complaint has been made before me that                               (name, description and 
address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                                         , 
punishable under section                    of the Indian Penal Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of 
arrest thereupon issued that the said                                            (name) cannot be found, and whereas it 
has been shown to my satisfaction that the said                   (name) has absconded (or is concealing 
himself to avoid the service of the said warranty); 
 
Proclamation is hereby made that the said                                          of                        is required to 
appear at                                              (place) before this Court (or before me) to answer the said 
complaint on the                day of                    
 
Dated, this 
day of      
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
________________

233 
FORM No. 5 
PROCLAMATION REQUIRING THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS 
(See sections 82, 87 and 90) 
 
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that                                           (name, description and 
address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                               (mention 
the 
offence 
concisely) 
and 
a 
warrant 
has 
been 
issued 
to 
compel 
the 
attendance                     
of                                 (name, description and address of the witness) before this Court to be examined 
touching the matter of the said complaint; and whereas it has been returned to the said warrant that                   
the said                                            (name of witness) cannot be served, and it has been shown to my 
satisfaction that he has absconded (or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant); 
 
Proclamation is hereby made that the said                                                                 (name) is required 
to appear at                          (place) before the Court                                     on the                               day 
of                                  next at                        o’clock to be examined touching                                the 
offence complained of. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
________________ 
 
FORM No. 6 
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE ATTENDANCE OF A WITNESS 
(See section 83) 
To the officer in charge of the police station at 
 
WHEREAS a warrant has been duly issued to compel the attendance of                (name, description 
and address) to testify concerning a complaint pending before this Court, and it has been returned to the 
said warrant that it cannot be served; and whereas it has been shown to my satisfaction that he has 
absconded (or is concealing himself to avoid the service of the said warrant); and thereupon a 
Proclamation has been or is being duly issued and published requiring the said                              to 
appear and give evidence at the time and place mentioned therein; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure the movable property belonging to the                
said                                       to the value of rupees                                     which you may find within the 
District                                 of                            and to hold the said property under attachment pending 
the further order of this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
 (Signature) 
________________

234 
FORM No. 7 
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT TO COMPEL THE APPEARANCE OF A PERSON ACCUSED 
(See section 83) 
To  
      (name and designation of the person or persons who is or are to execute the warrant). 
 
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that                                                (name, description 
and address) has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                       punishable 
under section                               of the Indian Penal Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest 
thereupon issued that the said                              (name) cannot be found; and whereas it has been shown 
to my satisfaction that the said                                      (name) has absconded (or is concealing himself               
to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation has been or is being duly issued 
and published requiring the said                                                                  to appear to answer the said 
charge within                       days; and whereas the said                            is possessed of the following 
property, other than land paying revenue to Government, in the village (or town), of                              , in 
the District of                            , viz.,                      , and an order has been made for the attachment 
thereof; 
 
You are hereby required to attach the said property in the manner specified in clause (a), or clause (c), 
or both*, of sub-section (2) of section 83, and to hold the same under attachment pending further order of 
this Court, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court)  
(Signature) 
__________________________________________________________________________ 
* Strike out the one which is not applicable, depending on the nature of the property to be attached. 
_______________ 
FORM No. 8 
ORDER AUTHORISING AN ATTACHMENT BY THE DISTRICT MAGISTRATE OR COLLECTOR 
(See section 83) 
 
To the District Magistrate/Collector of the District of 
 
 
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that                             (name, description and address) 
has committed (or is suspected to have committed) the offence of                     , punishable under              
section              of the Indian Penal Code, and it has been returned to a warrant of arrest thereupon              
issued that the said                                             (name) cannot be found; and whereas it has been                     
shown to my satisfaction that the said                    (name) has absconded (or is concealing                     
himself to avoid the service of the said warrant) and thereupon a Proclamation has been or is being duly 
issued and published requiring the said            (name) to appear to answer the said charge                     
within                             days; and whereas the said                         is possessed of certain land paying 
revenue to Government in the village (or town) of                        , in the District of                                   ; 
 
You are hereby authorised and requested to cause the said land to be attached, in the manner specified 
in clause (a), or clause (c), or both*, of sub-section (4) of section 83, and to be held under attachment 
pending the further order of this Court, and to certify without delay what you may have done in pursuance 
of this order. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________________________________________________________________________________ 
* Strike out the one which is not desired.

235 
FORM No. 9 
WARRANT IN THE FIRST INSTANCE TO BRING UP A WITNESS 
(See section 87) 
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant). 
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that                              (name and description                     
of accused)  of            (address) has (or is suspected to have) committed the offence of              (mention 
the offence concisely), and it appears likely that                                       (name and description of witness) 
can give evidence concerning the said complaint, and whereas I have good and sufficient reason to 
believe that he will not attend as a witness on the hearing of the said complaint unless compelled to do so; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to arrest the said                                            (name of witness), 
and on the                     day of                     to bring him before this Court                            , to be 
examined touching the offence complained of. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature)                  
_______________ 
 
FORM No. 10 
WARRANT TO SEARCH AFTER INFORMATION OF A PARTICULAR OFFENCE 
(See section 93) 
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant). 
WHEREAS information has been laid                                         (or complaint has been made) before 
me of the commission                                                                    (or suspected commission) of the offence 
of                             (mention the offence concisely), and it has been made to appear to me that the 
production of                                                 (specify the thing clearly) is essential to the inquiry now 
being made (or about to be made) into the said offence (or suspected offence); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to search for the said                                       (the thing specified) 
in the                                                 (describe the house or place or part thereof to which the search is to 
be confined), and, if found, to produce the same forthwith before this Court, returning this warrant, with 
an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
 (Signature) 
_______________

236 
FORM No. 11 
WARRANT TO SEARCH SUSPECTED PLACE OF DEPOSIT 
(See section 94) 
To  
       (name and designation of the police officer above the rank of a constable). 
 
WHEREAS information has been laid before me, and on due inquiry thereupon had, I have been led to 
believe that the                                              (describe the house or other place) is used as a place for the 
deposit (or sale) of stolen property (or if for either of the other purposes expressed in the section, state the 
purpose in the words of the section); 
This is to authorise and require you to enter the said house (or other place) with such assistance as 
shall be required, and to use, if necessary, reasonable force for that purpose, and to search every part of 
the said house (or other place, or if the search is to be confined to a part, specify the part clearly), and to 
seize and take possession of any property (or documents, or stamps, or seals, or coins, or obscene 
objects, as the case may be) (add, when the case requires it) and also of any instruments and materials 
which you may reasonably believe to be kept for the manufacture of forged documents, or counterfeit 
stamps, or false seals, or counterfeit coins or counterfeit currency notes (as the case may be), and 
forthwith to bring before this Court such of the said things as may be taken possession of, returning this 
warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_______________ 
 
FORM No. 12 
BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE 
(See sections 106 and 107) 
WHEREAS I,                                                 (name), inhabitant of                                             (place), 
have been called upon to enter into a bond to keep the peace for the term of                                    or until 
the completion of the inquiry in the matter of                                                     now pending in the Court 
of                                               , I hereby bind myself not to commit a breach of the peace, or do any act 
that may probably occasion a breach of the peace, during the said term or until the completion of the said 
inquiry and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit, to Government, the sum 
of rupees 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
 
(Signature) 
_______________

237 
FORM No. 13 
BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR 
(See sections 108, 109 and 110) 
 
WHEREAS I,                                    (name), inhabitant of                                                      (place), 
have been called upon to enter into a bond to be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens                 
of India for the term of (state the period) or until the completion of the inquiry in the matter                     
of                              now pending in the Court of                                         , I hereby bind myself to be of 
good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term or until the completion of 
the said inquiry; and, in case of my making default therein, I hereby bind myself to forfeit to Government 
the sum of rupees 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
 
(Signature) 
 
(Where a bond with sureties is to be executed, add) 
We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above-named 
that he will be of good behaviour to Government and all the citizens of India during the said term or until 
the completion of the said inquiry; and, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves, jointly 
and severally, to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees                        
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
 
(Signature) 
_______________ 
 
FORM No. 14 
SUMMONS ON INFORMATION OF A PROBABLE BREACH OF THE PEACE 
(See section 113) 
To                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of    
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me by credible information that                                   (state 
the substance of the information), and that you are likely to commit a breach of the peace (or by which  
act a breach of the peace will probably be occasioned), you are hereby required to attend in person (or   
by a duly authorised agent) at the office of the Magistrate of                 on the            day of          19        , 
at ten o’clock in the forenoon, to show cause why you should not be required to enter into a bond for 
rupees                   [when sureties are required, add, and also to give security by the bond of one (or two, 
as the case may be) surety (or sureties) in the sum of rupees                    (each if more than one)], that you 
will keep the peace for the term of  
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_______________

238 
FORM No. 15 
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY TO KEEP THE PEACE 
(See section 122) 
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at 
 
WHEREAS                                                           (name and address) appeared before me in person                
(or by his authorised agent) on the                       day of                              in obedience to a summons 
calling upon him to show cause why he should not enter into a bond for rupees                          with one 
surety (or a bond with two sureties each in rupees                   ), that he, the said                               (name) 
would keep the peace for the period of months; and whereas an order was then made requiring the                 
said                                        (name) to enter into and find such security                                           (state 
the security ordered when it differs from that mentioned in the summons), and he has failed to comply 
with the said order; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                   (name) into your custody, 
together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period                     
of                                                 (term of imprisonment) unless he shall in the meantime be lawfully 
ordered to be released, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_______________ 
FORM No. 16 
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON FAILURE TO FIND SECURITY FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR 
(See section 122) 
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at 
 
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that                                             (name and description) 
has been concealing his presence within the district of                                                   and that there is 
reason to believe that he is doing so with a view to committing a cognizable offence; 
or 
WHEREAS evidence of the general character of                                                   (name and description) 
has been adduced before me and recorded, from which it appears that he is an habitual robber (or                  
house-breaker, etc., as the case may be); 
 
AND WHEREAS an order has been recorded stating the same and requiring the said (name) to furnish 
security for his good behaviour for the term of (state the period) by entering into a bond with one surety 
(or two or more sureties, as the case may be), himself for rupees                                                    , and the 
said surety (or each of the said sureties) rupees                         , and the said                               (name)  
has failed to comply with the said order and for such default has been adjudged imprisonment for (state 
the term) unless the said security be sooner furnished; 
 
This is to authorise and require you receive the said                                            (name) into your 
custody, together with this warrant and him safely to keep in the Jail, or if he is already in prison, be 
detained therein, for the said period of (term of imprisonment) unless he shall in the meantime be lawfully 
ordered to be released, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_______________

239 
FORM No. 17 
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY 
(See sections 122 and 123) 
 
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at                      (or other officer in whose custody the person is). 
 
WHEREAS                                               (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your 
custody under warrant of the Court, dated the                          day of                         19                   ; and 
has since duly given security under section                 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
 
or 
 
WHEREAS                              (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your custody 
under warrant of the Court, dated the                              day of                                 19          ; and there 
have appeared to me sufficient grounds for the opinion that he can be released without hazard to the 
community; 
 
This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said                                 (name) from 
your custody unless he is liable to be detained for some other cause. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
 ,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_______________ 
FORM No. 18 
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY MAINTENANCE 
(See section 125) 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at 
 
WHEREAS                                              (name, description and address) has been proved before me 
to be possessed of sufficient means to maintain his wife                                                      (name) [or his      
child                              (name) or his father or mother                                        (name), who is by              
reason of (state the reason) unable to maintain herself (or himself)] and to have neglected (or refused) to 
do so, and an order has been duly made requiring the said                                       (name) to allow to          
his said                                     wife (or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of 
rupees                              ; and whereas it has been further proved that the said                               (name) 
in wilful disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees                             , being the amount of the 
allowance for the month (or months) of                                  ; 
 
And thereupon an order was made adjudging him to undergo imprisonment in the said Jail for the 
period of                           ; 
 
This is to authorise and require you receive the said                                  (name) into your custody in 
the said Jail, together with this warrant, and there carry the said order into execution according to law, 
returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
______________

240 
FORM No. 19 
WARRANT TO ENFORCE THE PAYMENT OF MAINTENANCE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE 
(See section 125) 
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person to execute the warrant). 
WHEREAS an order has been duly made requiring                                                            (name) to 
allow to his said wife (or child or father or mother) for maintenance the monthly sum of                   
rupees                                          , and whereas the said                                              (name) in wilful 
disregard of the said order has failed to pay rupees                                  , being the amount of the 
allowance for the month (or months) of  
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property belonging to the                     
said                                  (name) which may be found within the district of                                   , and if 
within                                     (state the number of days or hours allowed)                              next after 
such attachment the said sum shall not be paid (or forthwith), to sell the movable property attached, or so 
much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said sum, returning this warrant, with an endorsement 
certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
______________ 
FORM No. 20 
ORDER FOR THE REMOVAL OF NUISANCES 
(See section 133) 
 
To          (name, description and address). 
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you have caused an obstruction                     
(or nuisance) to persons using the public roadway (or other public place) which, etc., (describe the road 
or public place)                       by, etc., (state what it is that causes the obstruction or nuisance), and that 
such obstruction (or nuisance) still exists; 
or 
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are carrying on, as owner, or manager, the              
trade or occupation of                                                 (state the particular trade or occupation and the 
place where it is carried on), and that the same is injurious to the public health (or comfort) by                 
reason                               (state briefly in what manner the injurious effects are caused), and should be 
suppressed or removed to different place; 
or 
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are the owner (or are in possession of                     
or have the control over) a certain tank (or well or excavation) adjacent to the public way (describe the 
thoroughfare), and that the safety of the public is endangered by reason of the said tank (or well                     
or excavation) being without a fence or insecurely fenced); 
or 
WHEREAS, etc., etc., (as the case may be); 

241 
I do hereby direct and require you within                                          (state the time allowed) (state 
what is required to be done to abate the nuisance)                                                                    or to appear 
at                   in the                    Court of                        on the                 day of                                  next, 
and to show cause why this order should not be enforced; 
or 
I do hereby direct and require you within                                 (state the time allowed) to cease 
carrying on the said trade or occupation at the said place, and not again to carry on the same, or to remove 
the said trade from the place where it is now carried on, or to appear, etc.; 
or 
I do hereby direct and require you within                                                   (state the time allowed) to 
put up a sufficient fence (state the kind of fence and the part to be fenced); or to appear, etc.; 
or 
I do hereby direct and require you, etc., etc. (as the case may be). 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
______________ 
FORM No. 21 
MAGISTRATE’S NOTICE AND PEREMPTORY ORDER 
(See section 141) 
 
To          (name, description and address). 
I HEREBY give you notice that it has been found that the order issued on the                                     day 
of                             requiring you (state substantially the requisition in the order) is reasonable and 
proper.  Such order has been made absolute, and I hereby direct and require you to obey the said order 
within (state the time allowed), on peril of the penalty provided by the Indian Penal Code for 
disobedience thereto. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
______________ 
FORM No. 22 
INJUNCTION TO PROVIDE AGAINST IMMINENT DANGER PENDING INQUIRY 
(See section 142) 
 
To          (name, description and address). 
 
WHEREAS the inquiry into the conditional order issued by me on the             day of         ,19          , is  
pending, and it has been made to appear to me that the nuisance mentioned in the said order is attended 
with such imminent danger or injury of a serious kind to the public as to render necessary immediate 
measures to prevent such danger or injury, I do hereby, under the provisions of section 142 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973, direct and enjoin you forthwith to (state plainly what is required to be done as 
a temporary safeguard), pending the result of the inquiry. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

242 
FORM No. 23 
MAGISTRATE’S ORDER PROHIBITING THE REPETITION, ETC., OF A NUISANCE 
(See section 143) 
 
To          (name, description and address). 
 
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that, etc. (state the proper recital, guided by Form No. 20 
or Form No. 24, as the case may be); 
 
I do hereby strictly order and enjoin you not to repeat or continue, the said nuisance. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 24 
MAGISTRATE’S ORDER TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION, RIOT, ETC. 
(See section 144) 
 
To          (name, description and address). 
 
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you are in possession (or have the management) of 
(describe clearly the property), and that, in digging a drain on the said land, you are about to throw or 
place a portion of the earth and stones dug-up upon the adjoining public road, so as to occasion risk of 
obstruction to persons using the road; 
or 
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that you and a number of other persons (mention the 
class of persons) are about to meet and proceed in a procession along the public street, etc., (as the case 
may be) and that such procession is likely to lead to a riot or an affray; 
or 
WHEREAS, etc., etc., (as the case may be); 
I do hereby order you not to place or permit to be placed any of the earth or stones dug from land on any 
part of the said road; 
or 
I do hereby prohibit the procession passing along the said street, and strictly warn and enjoin you not 
to take any part in such procession (or as the case recited may require). 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

243 
FORM No. 25 
MAGISTRATE’S ORDER DECLARING PARTY ENTITLED TO RETAIN POSSESSION OF LAND, ETC., IN DISPUTE 
(See section 145) 
 
It appears to me, on the grounds duly recorded, that a dispute, likely to induce a breach of the peace, 
existed between                                      (describe the parties by name and residence or residence only if 
the dispute be between bodies of villagers) concerning certain                                        (state concisely the 
subject of dispute), situate within my local jurisdiction, all the said parties were called upon to give in a 
written statement of their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the said                     (the 
subject of dispute), and being satisfied by due inquiry had thereupon, without reference to the merits of 
the claim of either of the said parties to the legal right of possession, that the claim of actual possession by 
the said                                                 (name or names or description) is true; I do decide and declare that 
he is (or they are) in possession of the said                                                   (the subject of dispute) and 
entitled to retain such possession until ousted by due course of law, and do strictly forbid any disturbance 
of his (or their) possession in the meantime. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 26 
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT IN THE CASE OF A DISPUTE AS TO THE POSSESSION OF LAND, ETC. 
(See section 146) 
 
To the officer in charge of the police station at 
 
(or, To the Collector of                                                    ). 
 
WHEREAS it has been made to appear to me that a dispute likely to induce a breach of the peace, 
existed between                     (describe the parties concerned by name and residence, or residence only if 
the dispute be between bodies of villagers) concerning certain                                             (state concisely 
the subject of dispute) situate within the limits of my jurisdiction, and the said parties were thereupon 
duly called upon to state in writing their respective claims as to the fact of actual possession of the               
said                     (the subject of dispute), and whereas, upon due inquiry into the said claims, I have 
decided that neither of the said parties was in possession of the said                          (the subject of 
dispute) (or I am unable to satisfy myself as to which of the said parties was in possession as aforesaid); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach the said                                   (the subject of dispute) by 
taking and keeping possession thereof, and to hold the same under attachment until the decree or order of 
a competent Court determining the rights of the parties, or the claim to possession, shall have been 
obtained, and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

244 
FORM No. 27 
MAGISTRATE’S ORDER PROHIBITING THE DOING OF ANYTHING ON LAND OR WATER 
 (See section 147) 
A dispute having arisen concerning the right of use of                                              (state concisely the 
subject of dispute) situate within my local jurisdiction, the possession of which land (or water) is claimed 
exclusively by                                           (describe the person or persons), and it appears to me, on due 
inquiry into the same, that the said land (or water) has been open to the enjoyment of such use by the 
public (or if by an individual or a class of persons, describe him or them) and (if the use can be enjoyed 
throughout the year) that the said use has been enjoyed within three months of the institution of the said 
inquiry (or if the use is enjoyable only at a particular season, say, “during the last of the seasons at which 
the same is capable of being enjoyed”); 
I do order that the said                                (the claimant or claimants of possession) or any one in 
their interest, shall not take (or retain) possession of the said land (or water) to the exclusion of the 
enjoyment of the right of use aforesaid, until he (or they) shall obtain the decree or order of a competent 
Court adjudging him (or them) to be entitled to exclusive possession. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 28 
BOND AND BAIL-BOND ON A PRELIMINARY INQUIRY BEFORE A POLICE OFFICER 
 (See section 169) 
I, (name), of                                     , being charged with the offence of                                       , and 
after inquiry required to appear before the Magistrate of                          
or 
and after inquiry called upon to enter into my own recognizance to appear when required, do hereby bind 
myself to appear at                                 , in the Court of               , on the                 day of             next (or 
on such day as I may hereafter be required to attend) to answer further to the said charge, and in case of 
my making default herein.  I bind myself to forfeit to Government, the sum of rupees  
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Signature) 
 
I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us) surety (or 
sureties) for the above said (name) that he shall attend at                             in the Court of                     , on 
the            day of                 next (or on such day as he may hereafter be required to attend), further to 
answer to the charge pending against him, and, in case of his making default therein, I hereby bind myself 
(or we hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19       . 
 
(Signature) 
_____________

245 
FORM No. 29 
BOND TO PROSECUTE OR GIVE EVIDENCE 
 (See section 170) 
I,                                 (name) of                                             (place), do hereby bind myself to attend 
at                                 in the Court of                              at                                   o’clock on the            day 
of                          next and then and there to prosecute (or to prosecute and give evidence) (or to give 
evidence) in the matter of a charge of                            against one A.B., and, in case of making default 
herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19   . 
 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 30 
SPECIAL SUMMONS TO A PERSON ACCUSED OF A PETTY OFFENCE 
 (See section 206) 
To, 
(Name of the accused) 
of                                                      (address)  
WHEREAS your attendance is necessary to answer a charge of a petty offence (state shortly the offence 
charged), you are hereby required to appear in person (or by pleader) before                          (Magistrate) 
of                            on the                     day of                    19              , or if you desire to plead guilty to 
the charge without appearing before the Magistrate, to transmit before the aforesaid date the plea of guilty 
in writing and the sum of                   rupees as fine, or if you desire to appear by pleader and to plead 
guilty through such pleader, to authorise such pleader in writing to make such a plea of guilty on your 
behalf and to pay the fine through such pleader.  Herein fail not. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
(Note.-The amount of fine specified in this summons shall not exceed on hundred rupees.) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 31 
NOTICE OF COMMITMENT BY MAGISTRATE TO PUBLIC PROSECUTOR 
 (See section 209) 
The Magistrate of                        hereby gives notice that he has committed one                         for 
trial at the next Sessions; and the Magistrate hereby instructs the Public Prosecutor to conduct the 
prosecution of the said case. 
 
The charge against the accused is that,                                                 etc. (state the offence as in the 
charge) 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

246 
FORM No. 32 
CHARGES 
 (See sections 211,212 and 213) 
 
I. CHARGES WITH ONE-HEAD 
 
(1) (a) I,                                                                                     (name and office of Magistrate, etc.), 
hereby charge you                                    (name of accused person) as follows:— 
(b) On section 121—That you, on or about the                                 day of            , at              , waged 
war against the Government of India and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 121 of 
the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court. 
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by this Court on the said charge. 
 
(Signature and seal of the Magistrate) 
 
[To be substituted for (b)]:— 
 
(2) On section 124—That you, on or about the                 day of                           , at             , with the 
intention of inducing the President of India [or, as the case may be, the Governor of          (name of State)] 
to refrain from exercising a lawful power as such President (or, as the case may be, the Government) 
assaulted President (or, as the case may be, the Governor), and thereby committed an offence punishable 
under section 124 of the India Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court. 
(3) On section 161—That you, being a public servant in the                   Department, directly accepted 
from                            (state the name) for another party                 (state the name) gratification other than 
legal remuneration, as a motive for forbearing to do an official act, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court. 
(4) On section 166—That you, on or about the               day of                   , at          , did (or omitted 
to do, as the case may be)                 , such conduct being contrary to the provisions of              Act      , 
section          ,        and known by you to be prejudicial to                       , and thereby committed an 
offence punishable under section 166 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court. 
(5) On section 193—That you, on or about the                day of                , at          , in the course of 
the trial of                     before                        , stated in evidence that “                          “ which statement 
you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court. 
(6) On section 304—That you, on or about the              day of                    , at                   , committed 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, causing the death of                                         , and thereby 
committed an offence punishable under section 304 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance 
of this Court. 
(7) On section 306—That you, on or about the         day of         , at                   , abetted the 
commission of suicide by A.B., a person in a state of intoxication, and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 306 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court. 
(8) On section 325—That you, on or about the                  day of            , at                  , voluntarily 
caused grievous hurt to                        , and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 325 of 
the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court. 
(9) On section 392—That you, on or about the                   day of                           , at               , 
robbed               (state the name), and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 392 of the 
Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of this Court. 

247 
(10) On section 395—That you, on or about the                      day of                   , at                , 
committed dacoity, an offence punishable under section 395 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of this Court. 
II. CHARGES WITH TWO OR MORE HEADS 
(1) (a) I,                                                                           (name and office of Magistrate, etc.), hereby 
charge you                                                     (name of accused person) as follows:— 
(b) On section 241—First—That you, on or about the                day of                     , at          , 
knowing a coin to be counterfeit, delivered the same to another person, by name, A.B., as genuine, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 241 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session. 
Secondly—That you, on or about the                               day of                     , at             , knowing a 
coin to be counterfeit attempted to induce another person, by name, A.B., to receive it as genuine, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 241 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session. 
(c) And I hereby direct that you be tried by the said Court on the said charge. 
 
(Signature and seal of the Magistrate) 
 
[To be substituted for (b)]:— 
(2) On sections 302 and 304—First—That you, on or about the                 day of             , at           , 
committed murder by causing the death of                                      , and thereby committed an offence 
punishable under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of 
Session. 
Secondly—That you, on or about the                               day of                   , at                , by causing 
the death of                        , committed culpable homicide not amounting to murder, and thereby 
committed an offence punishable under section 304 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the  cognizance 
of the Court of Session. 
(3) On sections 379 and 382—First—That you, on or about the                  day of         , at           , 
committed theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian Penal 
Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. 
Secondly—That you, on or about the                         day of              , at                  , committed theft, 
having made preparation for causing death to a  person in order to the committing of such theft, and 
thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the 
cognizance of the Court of Session. 
Thirdly—That you, on or about the                        day of           , at           , committed theft, having 
made preparation for causing restraint to a person in order to the effecting of your escape after the 
committing of such theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382 of the Indian 
Penal Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. 
Fourthly—That you, on or about the                        day of                     , at                 , committed 
theft, having made preparation for causing fear of hurt to a person in order to the restraining of property 
taken by such theft and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 382 of the Indian Penal 
Code, and within the cognizance of the Court of Session. 
(4) Alternative charge on section 193—That you, on or about the                day of          , at           , 
in the course of the inquiry into               , before                      , stated in evidence that “               “, and 
that you, on or about the                       day of                         , at                        , in the course of the trial 
of                             , before                               , stated in the evidence that “                             “, one of 
which statements you either knew or believed to be false, or did not believe to be true, and thereby 
committed an offence punishable under section 193 of the Indian Penal Code, and within the cognizance 
of the Court of Session. 
 
(In cases tried by Magistrates substitute “within my cognizance” for “within the cognizance of the Court 
of Session”.) 

248 
III. CHARGES FOR THEFT AFTER PREVIOUS CONVICTION 
 
I,                                                                                           (name and office of Magistrate, etc.) 
hereby charge you                                                 (name of accused person) as follows: — 
 
That you, on or about the                              day of                      , at                   ,             committed 
theft, and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 379 of the Indian Penal Code, and 
within the cognizance of the Court of Session (or Magistrate, as the case may be).  And you, the said 
(name of accused), stand further charged that you, before the committing of the said offence, that is to 
say, on the day of                                , had been convicted by the                      (state Court by which 
conviction was had) at                                          of an offence punishable under Chapter XVII of the 
Indian Penal Code with imprisonment for a term of three years, that is to say, the offence of                    
house-breaking by night                                           (describe the offence in the words used in the section 
under which the accused was convicted), which conviction is still in full force and effect, and that you are 
thereby liable to enhanced punishment under section 75 of the Indian Penal Code. 
And I hereby direct that you be tried, etc. 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 33 
SUMMONS TO WITNESS 
 (See sections 61 and 244) 
To                                                                      of                            
WHEREAS complaint has been made before me that                                                      (name of the 
accused) of                                                 (address) has (or is suspected to have) committed the offence 
of                                                  (state the offence concisely with time and place), and it appears to me 
that you are likely to give material evidence or to produce any document or other thing for the 
prosecution; 
You are hereby summoned to appear before this Court on the             day of                   next at                  
ten o’clock in the forenoon, to produce such document or thing or to testify what you know concerning 
the matter of the said complaint, and not to depart thence without leave of the Court; and you are hereby 
warned that, if you shall without just excuse neglect or refuse to appear on the said date, a warrant will be 
issued to compel your attendance. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19   . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 34 
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT ON A SENTENCE OF IMPRISONMENT OR FINE IF PASSED BY A 1[COURT] 
2[(See sections 235, 248 and 255)] 
To the Officer in charge of Jail at  
WHEREAS on the                        day of                  ,                                         (name of the prisoner), 
the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) prisoner in case No.                         of the Calendar for 19             , 
was convicted before me                                                            (name and official designation) of the 
offence of                                                                                 (mention the offence or offences concisely) 
under section (or sections)                    of the Indian Penal Code (or of                            Act          ), and 
was sentenced to                                                  (state the punishment fully and distinctly); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                         (prisoner’s name) 
into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and thereby carry the aforesaid sentence into 
execution according to law. 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35, for “MAGISTRATE”. 
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid, for “(See sections 248 and 355)” (w.e.f. 18-12-1978). 

249 
FORM No. 35 
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FAILURE TO PAY COMPENSATION 
(See section 250) 
 
To the Officer in charge of Jail at 
 
WHEREAS                       (name and description) has brought against                                 (name and 
description of the accused person) the complaint that                                                           (mention it 
concisely) and the same has been dismissed on the ground that there was no reasonable ground for 
making the accusation against the said                                                        (name) and the order of 
dismissal awards payment by the said                                                    (name of complainant) of the sum 
of rupees                      as compensation; and whereas the said sum has not been paid and an order has 
been made for his simple imprisonment in Jail for the period of                   days, unless the aforesaid sum 
be sooner paid; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                                           (name) 
into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the said period of 
(term of imprisonment), subject to the provisions of section 69 of the Indian Penal Code, unless the said 
sum be sooner paid, and on the receipt thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with 
an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 36 
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR ANSWERING TO CHARGE OF 
OFFENCE 
(See section 267) 
 
To the Officer in charge of Jail at 
 
WHEREAS the attendance of                                                   (name of prisoner) at present 
confined/detained in the above-mentioned prison, is required in this Court to answer to a charge              
of                                                          (state shortly the offence charged) or for the purpose of a 
proceeding                                (state shortly the particulars of the proceeding); 
 
You are hereby required to produce the said                       under safe and sure conduct before this 
Court at              on the               day of             , 19      , by           A.M. there to answer to the said charge, 
or for the purpose of the said proceeding, and after this Court has dispensed with his further attendance, 
cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison. 
 
And you are further required to inform the said                              of the contents of this order and 
deliver to him the attached copy thereof. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
 
 
Countersigned. 
 
(Seal) 
(Signature) 
____________

250 
FORM No. 37 
ORDER REQUIRING PRODUCTION IN COURT OF PERSON IN PRISON FOR GIVING EVIDENCE 
(See section 267) 
 
 To the Officer in charge of the Jail at  
 
WHEREAS complaint has been made before this Court that                                            (name of the 
accused) of has committed the offence of                                                  (state offence concisely with time 
and place) and it appears that                                           (name of prisoner) at present confined/detained 
in the above-mentioned prison, is likely to give material evidence for the prosecution/defence; 
 
You are hereby required to produce the said                                   under safe and sure conduct before 
this Court at                        on the                      day of                           , 19       , by        A.M. there to give 
evidence in the matter now pending before this Court, and after this Court has dispensed with his further 
attendance, cause him to be conveyed under safe and sure conduct back to the said prison; 
 
And you are further required to inform the said                                           of the contents of this order 
and deliver to him the attached copy thereof. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
 
 
Countersigned. 
 
(Seal) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 38 
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT IN CERTAIN CASES OF CONTEMPT WHEN A FINE IS IMPOSED 
(See section 345) 
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at 
 
WHEREAS at a Court held before me on this day                                                 (name and description 
of the offender) in the presence (or view) of the Court committed wilful contempt;  
 
And whereas for such contempt the said                                                          (name of the offender) 
has been adjudged by the Court to pay a fine of rupees                            , or in default to suffer simple 
imprisonment for the period of                              (state the number of months or days); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                                          (name of 
the offender) into your custody, together with this warrant, and him safely to keep in the said Jail for the 
said period of                                (term of imprisonment), unless the said fine be sooner paid; and, on the 
receipt thereof, forthwith to set him at liberty, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the 
manner of its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

251 
FORM No. 39 
MAGISTRATE’S OR JUDGE’S WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF WITNESS REFUSING TO ANSWER OR TO 
PRODUCE DOCUMENT 
(See section 349) 
To 
(name and designation of officer of Court) 
 
WHEREAS                                                                                                   (name and description), 
being summoned (or brought before this Court) as a witness and this day required to give evidence on an 
inquiry into an alleged offence, refused to answer a certain question (or certain questions) put to him 
touching the said alleged offence, and duly recorded, or having been called upon to produce any 
document has refused to produce such document, without alleging any just excuse for such refusal, and 
for his refusal has been ordered to be detained in custody for                                  (term of detention 
adjudged); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to take the said                               (name) into custody, and him 
safely to keep in your custody for the period of                  days, unless in the meantime he shall consent to 
be examined and to answer the questions asked of him, or to produce the document called for from him, 
and on the last of the said days, or forthwith on such consent being known, to bring him before this Court 
to be dealt with according to law, returning this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its 
execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 40 
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT UNDER SENTENCE OF DEATH 
(See section 366) 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at 
 
WHEREAS at the Session held before me on the                   day of           , 19          ,                 (name of 
prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be), prisoner in case No.                                          of the 
Calendar for 19                     at the said Session, was duly convicted of the offence of culpable homicide 
amounting to murder under section                               of the Indian Penal Code, and sentenced to death, 
subject to the confirmation of the said sentence by the                     Court of                        ; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to receive the said                                          (prisoner’s name) 
into your custody in the said Jail, together with this warrant, and him there safely to keep until you shall 
receive the further warrant or order of this Court, carrying into effect the order of the said Court. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

252 
FORM No. 41 
WARRANT AFTER A COMMUTATION OF A SENTENCE 
1[(See sections 386, 413 and 416)] 
 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at 
 
WHEREAS at a Session held on the             day of               , 19          ,                                  (name of 
the prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) prisoner in case No.                              of the 
Calendar for 19            at the said Session, was convicted of the offence of                               , punishable 
under section                   of the Indian Penal Code, and sentenced to                              , and was 
thereupon committed to your custody; and whereas by the order of the                Court of                        (a 
duplicate of which is hereunto annexed) the punishment adjudged by the said sentence has been 
commuted to the punishment of imprisonment for life; 
 
This is to authorise and require you safely to keep the said                               (prisoner’s name) in 
your custody in the said Jail, as by law is required, until he shall be delivered over by you to the proper 
authority and custody for the purpose of his undergoing the punishment of imprisonment for life under 
the said order, 
or 
if the mitigated sentence is one of imprisonment, say, after the words “custody in the said Jail”, “and there 
to carry into execution the punishment of imprisonment under the said order according to law”. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19    . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 42 
WARRANT OF EXECUTION OF A SENTENCE OF DEATH 
2[(See sections 413 and 414)] 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at 
 
WHEREAS                                    (name of the prisoner), the (1st, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) 
Prisoner in case No.                           of the Calendar for 19                  at the Session held before me on 
the        day of         , 19          , has been by a warrant of the Court, dated the                   day of                  , 
committed to your custody under sentence of death;                            and whereas the order of the High 
Court at               confirming the said sentence has been received by this Court; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to carry the said sentence into execution by causing the                    
said               to be hanged by the neck until he be dead, at                                           (time and place of 
execution), and to return this warrant to the Court with an endorsement certifying that the sentence has 
been executed. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________
                                                 
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 for “(See section 386)” (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for “(See section 414)” (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

253 
FORM No. 43 
WARRANT TO LEVY A FINE BY ATTACHMENT AND SALE 
(See section 421) 
To 
(name and designation of the police officer or other person or persons who is or are to execute the 
warrant). 
 
WHEREAS                                                                     (name and description of the offender) was on 
the               day of                , 19        , convicted before me of the offence of                       (mention the 
offence concisely), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                                             ; and whereas the 
said                      (name), although required to pay the said fine, has not paid the same or any part thereof; 
 
This is to authorize and require you to attach any movable property belonging to the said         (name), 
which may be found within the district of                     ; and, if within                             (state the number 
of days or hours allowed) next after such attachment the said sum shall not be paid (or forthwith), to sell 
the movable property attached, or so much thereof as shall be sufficient to satisfy the said fine, returning 
this warrant, with an endorsement certifying what you have done under it, immediately upon its 
execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 44 
WARRANT FOR RECOVERY OF FINE 
(See section 421) 
 
To the Collector of the district of  
 
WHEREAS                                                           (name, address and description of the offender) was 
on the            day of             , 19                , convicted before me of the offence of                          (mention 
the offence concisely), and sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                      ; and 
 
WHEREAS the said                                          (name), although require to pay the said fine, has not 
paid the same or any part of thereof; 
 
You are hereby authorised and requested to realise the amount of the said fine as arrears of land 
revenue from the movable or immovable property, or both, of the said                                          (name) 
and to certify without delay what you have done in pursuance of this order. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

254 
1[FORM No. 44A 
BOND FOR APPEARANCE OF OFFENDER RELEASED PENDING REALISATION OF FINE 
[See section 424 (1) (b)] 
 
WHEREAS I,                                                (name) inhabitant of                                   (place), have 
been sentenced to pay a fine of rupees                                    and in default of payment thereof to undergo 
imprisonment for                               ; and whereas the Court has been pleased to order my release on 
condition of my executing a bond for my appearance on the following date (or dates), namely:— 
 
I hereby bind myself to appear before the Court of                        at                 o’clock on the 
following date (or dates), namely:— 
and, in case of making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19     . 
 
 
(Signature) 
 
WHERE A BOND WITH SURETIES IS TO BE EXECUTED, ADD— 
We do hereby declare ourselves sureties for the above-named that he will appear before the Court of 
on the following date (or dates), namely:— 
And, in case of his making default therein, we bind ourselves jointly and severally to forfeit to 
Government the sum of rupees. 
(Signature).] 
_____________ 
 
 
FORM No. 45 
BOND AND BAIL-BOND FOR ATTENDANCE BEFORE OFFICER IN CHARGE OF POLICE STATION OR COURT 
 
[See sections 436, 2[436A,] 437, 3[437A,] 438 (3) and 441] 
 
I,                                      (name), of                              (place), having been arrested or detained 
without warrant by the Officer in charge of                                   police station (or having been brought 
before the Court of                           ), charged with the offence of                                 , and required to 
give security for my attendance before such Officer of Court on condition that I shall attend such Officer 
or Court on every day on which any investigation or trial is held with regard to such charge, and in case 
of my making default herein, I bind myself to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19    . 
 
(Signature) 
 
I hereby declare myself (or we jointly and severally declare ourselves and each of us) surety (or 
sureties) for the above said                                                   (name) that he shall attend the Officer in 
charge of                                         police station or the Court of                                             on every day 
on which any investigation into the charge is made or any trial on such charge is held, that he shall be, 
and appear, before such Officer or Court for the purpose of such investigation or to answer the charge 
against him (as the case may be), and, in case of his making default herein, I hereby bind myself (or we, 
hereby bind ourselves) to forfeit to Government the sum of                  rupees. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19     . 
 
 
(Signature) 
 
_____________
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 43 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 5 of 2009, s. 32 (w.e.f. 31-12-2009).  

255 
FORM No. 46 
WARRANT TO DISCHARGE A PERSON IMPRISONED ON FAILURE TO GIVE SECURITY 
(See section 442) 
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at     
(or other officer in whose custody the person is) 
 
WHEREAS                                                 (name and description of prisoner) was committed to your 
custody under warrant of this Court, dated the                day of                                  , and has since with 
his surety (or sureties) duly executed a bond under section 441 of the Code of Criminal Procedure; 
 
This is to authorise and require you forthwith to discharge the said                         (name) from your 
custody, unless he is liable to be detained for some other matter. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
1[FORM No. 47 
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT TO ENFORCE A BOND 
(See section 446) 
To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at  
 
WHEREAS                                                           (name, description and address of person) has failed 
to appear on                      (mention the occasion) pursuant to his recognizance, and has by default 
forfeited to Government the sum of rupees                                    (the penalty in the bond); and whereas 
the said                                  (name of person) has, on due notice to him, failed to pay the said sum or 
show any sufficient cause why payment should not be enforced against him; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property of the said                   (name) that 
you may find within the district of                                     , by seizure and detention, and, if the said 
amount be not paid within                            , days to sell the property so attached or so much of it as may 
be sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and to make return of what you have done under this warrant 
immediately upon its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19       . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature)] 
_____________
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 45 of 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 18-12-1978).  

256 
FORM No. 48 
NOTICE TO SURETY ON BREACH OF A BOND 
(See section 446) 
 
To                                                     of            
 
WHEREAS on the                               day of                                         , 19                 , you became 
surety for                            (name) of                                                      (place) that he should appear 
before this Court on the                          day of                            and bound yourself in default thereof to 
forfeit the sum of rupees                               to Government; and whereas the said                             (name) 
has failed to appear before this Court and by reason of such default you have forfeited the aforesaid sum 
of rupees. 
 
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty or show cause, within                     days from this 
date, why payment of the said sum should not be enforced against you. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 49 
NOTICE TO SURETY OF FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR 
 (See section 446) 
 
To                                          of 
WHEREAS on the                day of            , 19        , you became surety by a bond for               (name) 
of                     (place) that he would be of good behaviour for the period of                    and bound 
yourself in default thereof to forfeit the sum of rupees                                 to Government; and whereas 
the said                                                                                             (name) has been convicted of the 
offence of                                (mention the offence concisely) committed since you became such surety, 
whereby your security bond has become forfeited; 
 
You are hereby required to pay the said penalty of rupees                                  or to show cause 
within                     days why it should not be paid. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
,19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
 
_____________

257 
FORM No. 50 
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AGAINST A SURETY 
(See section 446) 
 
To                                                    of 
WHEREAS                                                              (name, description and address) has bound himself 
as surety for the appearance of                                                         (mention the condition of the bond) and 
the said                                                    (name) has made default, and thereby forfeited to Government 
the sum of rupees                                                    (the penalty in the bond); 
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach any movable property of the said                           (name) 
which you may find within the district of                                             , by seizure and detention; and, if the 
said amount be not paid within                                 days, to sell the property so attached, or so much of it 
as may be sufficient to realise the amount aforesaid, and make return of what you have done under this 
warrant immediately upon its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 51 
WARRANT OF COMMITMENT OF THE SURETY OF AN ACCUSED PERSON ADMITTED TO BAIL  
 (See section 446) 
 
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at 
 
WHEREAS                                                                         (name and description of surety) has bound 
himself as a surety for the appearance of                                                (state the condition of the bond) 
and the said                               (name) has therein made default whereby the penalty mentioned in the 
said bond has been forfeited to Government; and whereas the said                              (name of surety) has, 
on due notice to him, failed to pay the said sum or show any sufficient cause why payment should not be 
enforced against him, and the same cannot be recovered by attachment and sale of his movable property, 
and an order has been made for his imprisonment in the Civil Jail for                         (Specify the period); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent                                   (or Keeper) to 
receive the said                                      (name) into your custody with the warrant and to keep him safely 
in the said Jail for the said                               (term of imprisonment), and to return this warrant with an 
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19      . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

258 
FORM No. 52 
NOTICE TO THE PRINCIPAL OF FORFEITURE OF BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE 
(See section 446) 
To             (name, description and address) 
 
WHEREAS on the                       day of                                     , 19              , you entered into a bond not 
to commit, etc.,                                                      (as in the bond), and proof of the forfeiture of the same 
has been given before me and duly recorded; 
 
You are hereby called upon to pay the said penalty of rupees                               or to show cause before 
me within                                 days why payment of the same should not be enforced against you. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 53 
WARRANT TO ATTACH THE PROPERTY OF THE PRINCIPAL ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE 
 (See section 446) 
 
To  
(name and designation of police officer), at the police station of 
 
WHEREAS                                                                                                 (name and description) did, on 
the                 day of                 , 19          , enter into a bond for the sum of rupees                   binding 
himself not to commit a breach of the peace, etc.,                                             (as in the bond), and proof 
of the forfeiture of the said bond has been given before me and duly recorded; and whereas notice has 
been given to the said                                      (name) calling upon him to show cause why the said sum 
should not be paid, and he has failed to do so or to pay the said sum; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging to the              
said                          (name) to the value of rupees                             , which you may find within the 
district of                      , and, if the said sum be not paid within                                   , to sell the property 
so attached, or so much of it as may be sufficient to realize the same; and to make return of what you have 
done under this warrant immediately upon its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19          . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

259 
FORM No. 54 
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON BREACH OF A BOND TO KEEP THE PEACE 
(See section 446) 
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at 
WHEREAS proof has been given before me and duly recorded that                               (name and 
description) has committed a breach of the bond entered into by him to keep the peace, whereby he has 
forfeited to Government the sum of rupees                        ; and whereas the said                          (name) 
has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, although duly called 
upon to do so, and payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable property, and an 
order has been made for the imprisonment of the said                                      (name) in the Civil Jail of 
the period of                        (term of imprisonment); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the said Superintendent                                              (or Keeper) 
of the said Civil Jail to receive the said                        (name) into your custody, together with this 
warrant, and to keep his safely in the said Jail for the said period of                          (term of 
imprisonment), and to return this warrant with an endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
FORM No. 55 
WARRANT OF ATTACHMENT AND SALE ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR  
 (See section 446) 
To the Police Officer in charge of the police station at 
 
WHEREAS                                 (name, description and address)               did, on the                      day 
of                   , 19        , give security by bond in the sum of rupees                             for the good 
behaviour of                                                       (name, etc., of the principal), and proof has been given 
before me and duly recorded of the commission by the said                                                (name) of the 
offence of whereby the said bond has been forfeited; and whereas notice has been given to the                 
said                              (name) calling upon him to show cause why the said sum should not be paid, and 
he has failed to do so to pay the said sum; 
 
This is to authorise and require you to attach by seizure movable property belonging to the                    
said               (name) to the value of rupees             which you may find within the district of              , and, 
if the said sum be not paid within                     , to sell the property so attached, or so much of it as may be 
sufficient to realise the same, and to make return of what you have done under this warrant immediately 
upon its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19        . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________

260 
FORM No. 56 
WARRANT OF IMPRISONMENT ON FORFEITURE OF BOND FOR GOOD BEHAVIOUR 
 (See section 446) 
 
To the Superintendent (or Keeper) of the Civil Jail at 
 
 
WHEREAS                               (name, description and address) did, on the day of          , 19      , give 
security by bond in the sum of rupees                              for the good behaviour of                  (name, etc., 
of the principal), and proof of the breach of the said bond has been given before me and duly recorded, 
whereby the said                               (name) has forfeited to Government the sum of rupees                   , 
and whereas he has failed to pay the said sum or to show cause why the said sum should not be paid 
although duly called upon to do so, and payment thereof cannot be enforced by attachment of his movable 
property, and an order has been made for the imprisonment of the said                             (name) in the 
Civil Jail for the period of                               (term of imprisonment); 
 
This is to authorise and require you, the Superintendent                                      (or Keeper), to receive 
the said                             (name) into your custody, together with this warrant, and to keep him safely in 
the said Jail for the said period of                            (term of imprisonment), returning this warrant with an 
endorsement certifying the manner of its execution. 
 
Dated, this 
day of 
, 19     . 
 
(Seal of the Court) 
(Signature) 
_____________ 
 
 
STATE AMENDMENT 
Andhra Pradesh 
Amendment of Form No. 45 in the Second Schedule. — In the Principal Act, in the Second Schedule, 
in Form No. 45, in paragraph 2, after the words, “to forfeit to Government the sum of rupees” the 
following words shall be added namely:— 
“and I shall pay the fine imposed by the court in case I fail to produce the accused on the date fixed by 
the court.” 
[Vide Andhra Pradesh Act 17 of 2019 s. 3]  

261 
APPENDIX 
EXTRACTS FROM THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2005  
NO. 25 OF 2005 
[23rd  June, 2005.] 
An Act further to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. Short title and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Code of Criminal Procedure 
(Amendment) Act, 2005. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 1[; and different dates* may be appointed for different 
provisions of this Act.]  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
16. Insertion of new section 144A.—In Chapter X of the principal Act, under sub-heading 
“C.—Urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger”, after section 144, the following section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘144A. Power to prohibit carrying arms in procession or mass drill or mass training with 
arms.—(1) The District Magistrate may, whenever he considers it necessary so to do for the 
preservation of public peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public order, by public notice 
or by order, prohibit in any area within the local limits of his jurisdiction, the carrying of arms in any 
procession or the organising or holding of, or taking part in, any mass drill or mass training with arms 
in any public place. 
(2) A public notice issued or an order made under this section may be directed to a particular 
person or to persons belonging to any community, party or organisation. 
(3) No public notice issued or an order made under this section shall remain in force for more 
than three months from the date on which it is issued or made. 
(4) The State Government may, if it considers necessary so to do for the preservation of public 
peace or public safety or for the maintenance of public order, by notification, direct that a public 
notice issued or order made by the District Magistrate under this section shall remain in force for such 
further period not exceeding six months from the date on which such public notice or order was 
issued or made by the District Magistrate would have, but for such direction, expired, as it may 
specify in the said notification. 
(5) The State Government may, subject to such control and directions as it may deem fit to 
impose, by general or special order, delegate its powers under sub-section (4) to the District 
Magistrate.
                                                 
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 2-6-2006). 
*     23-6-2006, vide Notification No.S.O. 923(E) dated 21-6-2006 [Except the Provisions of Section 16, 25, 28(a), 28(b), 38, 
42(a), 42(b),  42(f)(iii) and (iv) and 44(a)].  

262 
Explanation.—The word “arms” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 153AA of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).’. 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
1* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
28. Amendment of section 320.—In section 320 of the principal Act, in the Table under sub-section 
(2),— 
(a) the words “Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means” in column 1 and the 
entries relating thereto in columns 2 and 3 shall be omitted; 
(b) in column 3, for the word “Ditto”, against the entry relating to section 325, the words “The 
person to whom the hurt is caused” shall be substituted. 
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
38. Amendment of section 438.—In section 438 of the principal Act, for sub-section (1), the 
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having 
committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a 
direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be released on bail; and that Court 
may, after taking into consideration, inter alia, the following factors, namely:— 
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation; 
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously 
undergone imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence; 
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and 
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the 
applicant by having him so arrested, 
either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail: 
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of Session, has not passed 
any interim order under this sub-section or has rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail, it 
shall be open to an officer in-charge of a police station to arrest, without warrant the applicant on the 
basis of the accusation apprehended in such application. 
(1A) Where the Court grants an interim order under sub-section (1), it shall forthwith cause a 
notice being not less than seven days notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the 
Public Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the Public Prosecutor a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard when the application shall be finally heard by the Court.
                                                 
1. S. 25 omitted by Act 2 of 2006, s. 8 (w.e.f. 16-4-2006). 

263 
(1B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be obligatory at the time of final 
hearing of the application and passing of final order by the Court, if on an application made to it by 
the Public Prosecutor, the Court considers such presence necessary in the interest of justice.”. 
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
42. Amendment of the First Schedule.—In the First Schedule to the principal Act, under the 
heading “I.—OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN PENAL CODE”,— 
(a) after the entries relating to section 153A, the following entries shall be inserted, namely:— 
1 
2 
 3 
            4    
5 
               6 
“153AA Knowingly carrying 
  Imprisonment 
 Ditto      Ditto   Any Magistrate.”; 
 
arms in any procession or    for 6 months 
 
          
 
organising or holding or 
   and fine of 
 
taking part in any mass 
    2,000 rupees 
 
drill or mass training 
 
with arms 
(b) in the 6th column, in the entries relating to section 153B, for the word “Ditto”, the words 
“Magistrate of the first class” shall be substituted;  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
(f) in the 5th column, in the entries relating to— 
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
(iii) section 324, for the word “Ditto”, the word “Non-bailable” shall be substituted; 
(iv) section 325, for the word “Ditto”, the word “Bailable” shall be substituted. 
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
44. Amendment of Act 45 of 1860.—In the Indian Penal Code,— 
(a) after section 153A, the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘153AA. Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession or organising, or 
holding or taking part in any mass drill or mass training with arms.—Whoever knowingly 
carries arms in any procession or organizes or holds or takes part in any mass drill or mass 
training with arms in any public place in contravention of any public notice or order issued or 
made under section 144A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which may extend to 
two thousand rupees. 
Explanation.—”Arms” means articles of any description designed or adapted as weapons for 
offence or defence and includes fire arms, sharp edged weapons, lathis, dandas and sticks.’.  
*                                    *                                    *                                     *                               * 
––––––––– 
 

1 
 
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019 
____________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
____________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS. 
3. Central Consumer Protection Council. 
4. Procedure for meetings of Central Council. 
5. Objects of Central Council. 
6. State Consumer Protection Councils. 
7. Objects of State Council. 
8. District Consumer Protection Council. 
9. Objects of District Council. 
CHAPTER III 
CENTRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION AUTHORITY 
10. Establishment of Central Consumer Protection Authority. 
11. Qualifications, method of recruitment, etc., of Chief Commissioner and Commissioners. 
12. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Authority. 
13. Appointment of officers, experts, professionals and other employees of Central Authority. 
14. Procedure of Central Authority. 
15. Investigation Wing. 
16. Power of District Collector. 
17. Complaints to authorities. 
18. Powers and functions of Central Authority. 
19. Power of Central Authority to refer matter for investigation or to other Regulator. 
20. Power of Central Authority to recall goods, etc. 
21. Power of Central Authority to issue directions and penalties against false or misleading 
advertisements. 
22. Search and seizure. 
23. Designation of any statutory authority or body to function as Central Authority. 
24. Appeal. 
25. Grants by Central Government. 
26. Accounts and audit. 
27. Furnishing of annual reports, etc. 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSUMER DISPUTES REDRESSAL COMMISSION 
28. Establishment of District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. 
29. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of District Commission. 
 
 

2 
 
SECTIONS  
30. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of President and members of 
District Commission. 
31. Transitional provision. 
32. Vacancy in office of member of District Commission. 
33. Officers and other employees of District Commission. 
34. Jurisdiction of District Commission. 
35. Manner in which complaint shall be made. 
36. Proceedings before District Commission. 
37. Reference to mediation. 
38. Procedure on admission of complaint. 
39. Findings of District Commission. 
40. Review by District Commission in certain cases. 
41. Appeal against order of District Commission. 
42. Establishment of State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. 
43. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of State Commission. 
44. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of President and members of State 
Commission. 
45. Transitional provision. 
46. Officers and employees of State Commission. 
47. Jurisdiction of State Commission. 
48. Transfer of cases. 
49. Procedure applicable to State Commission. 
50. Review by State Commission in certain cases. 
51. Appeal to National Commission. 
52. Hearing of appeal. 
53. Establishment of National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. 
54. Composition of National Commission. 
55. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of National Commission. 
56. Transitional provision. 
57. Other officers and employees of National Commission. 
58. Jurisdiction of National Commission. 
59. Procedure applicable to National Commission. 
60. Review by National Commission in certain cases. 
61. Power to set aside ex parte orders. 
62. Transfer of cases. 
63. Vacancy in office of President of National Commission. 
64. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to invalidate orders. 
65. Service of notice, etc. 
66. Experts to assist National Commission or State Commission. 
67. Appeal against order of National Commission. 
68. Finality of orders. 
69. Limitation period. 
70. Administrative control. 
71. Enforcement of orders of District Commission, State Commission and National Commission. 
72. Penalty for non-compliance of order. 
73. Appeal against order passed under section 72. 

3 
 
CHAPTER V 
MEDIATION 
SECTIONS 
74. Establishment of consumer mediation cell. 
75. Empanelment of mediators. 
76. Nomination of mediators from panel. 
77. Duty of mediator to disclose certain facts. 
78. Replacement of mediator in certain cases. 
79. Procedure for mediation. 
80. Settlement through mediation. 
81. Recording settlement and passing of order. 
CHAPTER VI 
PRODUCT LIABILLITY 
82. Application of Chapter. 
83. Product liability action 
84. Liability of product manufacturer. 
85. Liability of product service provider. 
86. Liability of product sellers. 
87. Exceptions to product liability action. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
88. Penalty for non-compliance of direction of Central Authority. 
89. Punishment for false or misleading advertisement. 
90. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or storing, selling or distributing or importing products 
containing adulterant. 
91. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or for storing or selling or distributing or importing 
spurious goods. 
92. Cognizance of offence by court. 
93. Vexatious search. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
94. Measures to prevent unfair trade practices in e-commerce, direct selling, etc. 
95. Presidents, members, Chief Commissioner, Commissioner and certain officers to be public 
servants. 
96. Compounding of offences. 
97. Manner of crediting penalty. 
98. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
99. Power to give directions by Central Government. 
100. Act not in derogation of any other. 
101. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
102. Power of State Government to make rules. 
103. Power of National Commission to make regulations. 
104. Power of Central Authority to make regulations. 
105. Rules and regulations to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
106. Power to Remove Difficulties. 
107. Repeal and savings. 
 

4 
 
THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 2019 
ACT NO. 35 OF 2019 
 
[9th August, 2019.] 
An Act to provide for protection of the interests of consumers and for the said purpose, to establish 
authorities for timely and effective administration and settlement of consumers' disputes and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.—(1) This Act may be called the Consumer 
Protection Act, 2019. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different States and for different provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of that provision. 
(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the Central Government, by notification, this Act shall 
apply to all goods and services. 
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(1) "advertisement" means any audio or visual publicity, representation, endorsement or 
pronouncement made by means of light, sound, smoke, gas, print, electronic media, internet or 
website and includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper, invoice or such other documents; 
(2) "appropriate laboratory" means a laboratory or an organisation— 
(i) recognised by the Central Government; or 
(ii) recognised by a State Government, subject to such guidelines as may be issued by the 
Central Government in this behalf; or 
(iii) established by or under any law for the time being in force, which is maintained, 
financed or aided by the Central Government or a State Government for carrying out analysis or 
test of any goods with a view to determining whether such goods suffer from any defect; 
(3) "branch office" means— 
(i) any office or place of work described as a branch by the establishment; or 
(ii) any establishment carrying on either the same or substantially the same activity carried on 
by the head office of the establishment; 
(4) "Central Authority" means the Central Consumer Protection Authority established under 
section 10; 
(5) "complainant" means— 
(i) a consumer; or  
(ii) any voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the time being in force; or 
                                                          
1. 24th July, 2020.-- S. 2 [clauses (4), (13), (14), (16), (40)], s. 10 to 27 (both inclusive), sub-clause (iv) of clause (a) of            
sub-section (1) of section  58, s. 88, 89, 92 and 93, 94, 96, 97 and 99, clause (f) to (m) of sub-section 2 and clauses (zg), (zh) 
and (zi) of sub-section 2 of s. 101, 104, vide notification No. S.O. 2421(E), dated 23rd July 2020, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 

5 
 
(iii) the Central Government or any State Government; or 
 (iv) the Central Authority; or 
(v) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the same interest; or 
(vi) in case of death of a consumer, his legal heir or legal representative; or 
(vii) in case of a consumer being a minor, his parent or legal guardian; 
(6) "complaint" means any allegation in writing, made by a complainant for obtaining any relief 
provided by or under this Act, that— 
(i) an unfair contract or unfair trade practice or a restrictive trade practice has been adopted 
by any trader or service provider; 
(ii) the goods bought by him or agreed to be bought by him suffer from one or more defects; 
(iii) the services hired or availed of or agreed to be hired or availed of by him suffer from any 
deficiency; 
(iv) a trader or a service provider, as the case may be, has charged for the goods or for the 
services mentioned in the complaint, a price in excess of the price— 
(a) fixed by or under any law for the time being in force; or 
(b) displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods; or 
(c) displayed on the price list exhibited by him by or under any law for the time being in 
force; or 
(d) agreed between the parties; 
(v) the goods, which are hazardous to life and safety when used, are being offered for sale to 
the public-- 
(a) in contravention of standards relating to safety of such goods as required to be 
complied with, by or under any law for the time being in force; 
(b) where the trader knows that the goods so offered are unsafe to the public; 
(vi) the services which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to life and safety of the public 
when used, are being offered by a person who provides any service and who knows it to be 
injurious to life and safety; 
(vii) a claim for product liability action lies against the product manufacturer, product seller 
or product service provider, as the case may be; 
(7) "consumer" means any person who— 
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and 
partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any user of such 
goods other than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly 
paid or partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment, when such use is made 
with the approval of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for 
resale or for any commercial purpose; or 
(ii) hires or avails of any service for a consideration which has been paid or promised or 
partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any 
beneficiary of such service other than the person who hires or avails of the services for 
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of 
deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned 
person, but does not include a person who avails of such service for any commercial purpose. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, — 

6 
 
(a) the expression "commercial purpose" does not include use by a person of goods 
bought and used by him exclusively for the purpose of earning his livelihood, by means 
of self-employment; 
(b) the expressions "buys any goods" and "hires or avails any services" includes 
offline or online transactions through electronic means or by teleshopping or direct 
selling or multi-level marketing; 
(8) "consumer dispute" means a dispute where the person against whom a complaint has been 
made, denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint; 
(9) "consumer rights" includes,-- 
(i) the right to be protected against the marketing of goods, products or services which are 
hazardous to life and property; 
(ii) the right to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity, standard and price of 
goods, products or services, as the case may be, so as to protect the consumer against unfair trade 
practices; 
(iii) the right to be assured, wherever possible, access to a variety of goods, products or 
services at competitive prices; 
(iv) the right to be heard and to be assured that consumer's interests will receive due 
consideration at appropriate for a; 
(v) the right to seek redressal against unfair trade practice or restrictive trade practices or 
unscrupulous exploitation of consumers; and 
(vi) the right to consumer awareness; 
(10) "defect" means any fault, imperfection or shortcoming in the quality, quantity, potency, 
purity or standard which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being in force 
or under any contract, express or implied or as is claimed by the trader in any manner whatsoever in 
relation to any goods or product and the expression "defective" shall be construed accordingly; 
(11) "deficiency" means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature 
and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being 
in force or has been undertaken to be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or otherwise in 
relation to any service and includes— 
(i) any act of negligence or omission or commission by such person which causes loss or 
injury to the consumer; and 
(ii) deliberate withholding of relevant information by such person to the consumer; 
(12) "design", in relation to a product, means the intended or known physical and material 
characteristics of such product and includes any intended or known formulation or content of such 
product and the usual result of the intended manufacturing or other process used to produce such 
product; 
(13) "direct selling" means marketing, distribution and sale of goods or provision of services 
through a network of sellers, other than through a permanent retail location; 
(14) "Director-General" means the Director-General appointed under sub-section (2) of section 
15; 
(15) "District Commission" means a District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established under sub-section (1) of section 28; 
(16) "e-commerce" means buying or selling of goods or services including digital products over 
digital or electronic network; 

7 
 
(17) "electronic service provider" means a person who provides technologies or processes to 
enable a product seller to engage in advertising or selling goods or services to a consumer and 
includes any online market place or online auction sites; 
(18) "endorsement", in relation to an advertisement, means— 
(i) any message, verbal statement, demonstration; or 
(ii) depiction of the name, signature, likeness or other identifiable personal characteristics of 
an individual; or 
(iii) depiction of the name or seal of any institution or organisation, which makes the 
consumer to believe that it reflects the opinion, finding or experience of the person making such 
endorsement; 
(19) "establishment" includes an advertising agency, commission agent, manufacturing, trading 
or any other commercial agency which carries on any business, trade or profession or any work in 
connection with or incidental or ancillary to any commercial activity, trade or profession, or such 
other class or classes of persons including public utility entities in the manner as may be prescribed; 
(20) "express warranty" means any material statement, affirmation of fact, promise or description 
relating to a product or service warranting that it conforms to such material statement, affirmation, 
promise or description and includes any sample or model of a product warranting that the whole of 
such product conforms to such sample or model; 
(21) "goods" means every kind of movable property and includes "food" as defined in clause (j) 
of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006); 
(22) "harm", in relation to a product liability, includes— 
(i) damage to any property, other than the product itself; 
(ii) personal injury, illness or death; 
(iii) mental agony or emotional distress attendant to personal injury or illness or damage to 
property; or 
(iv) any loss of consortium or services or other loss resulting from a harm referred to in sub-
clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) or sub-clause (iii), but shall not include any harm caused to a product 
itself or any damage to the property on account of breach of warranty conditions or any 
commercial or economic loss, including any direct, incidental or consequential loss relating 
thereto; 
(23) "injury" means any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind or property; 
(24) "manufacturer" means a person who— 
(i) makes any goods or parts thereof; or 
(ii) assembles any goods or parts thereof made by others; or 
(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any goods made by any other person; 
(25) "mediation" means the process by which a mediator mediates the consumer disputes; 
(26) "mediator" means a mediator referred to in section 75; 
(27) "member" includes the President and a member of the National Commission or a State 
Commission or a District Commission, as the case may be; 
(28) "misleading advertisement" in relation to any product or service, means an advertisement, 
which— 
(i) falsely describes such product or service; or 
(ii) gives a false guarantee to, or is likely to mislead the consumers as to the nature, 
substance, quantity or quality of such product or service; or 

8 
 
(iii) conveys an express or implied representation which, if made by the manufacturer or 
seller or service provider thereof, would constitute an unfair trade practice; or 
(iv) deliberately conceals important information; 
(29) "National Commission" means the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established under sub-section (1) of section 53; 
(30) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the term "notify" 
shall be construed accordingly; 
(31) "person" includes-- 
(i) an individual; 
(ii) a firm whether registered or not; 
(iii) a Hindu undivided family; 
(iv) a co-operative society; 
(v) an association of persons whether registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 
(21 of 1860) or not; 
(vi) any corporation, company or a body of individuals whether incorporated or not; 
(vii) any artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses; 
(32) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government, or, as the case may 
be, the State Government; 
(33) "product" means any article or goods or substance or raw material or any extended cycle of 
such product, which may be in gaseous, liquid, or solid state possessing intrinsic value which is 
capable of delivery either as wholly assembled or as a component part and is produced for 
introduction to trade or commerce, but does not include human tissues, blood, blood products and 
organs; 
(34) "product liability" means the responsibility of a product manufacturer or product seller, of 
any product or service, to compensate for any harm caused to a consumer by such defective product 
manufactured or sold or by deficiency in services relating thereto; 
(35) "product liability action" means a complaint filed by a person before a District Commission 
or State Commission or National Commission, as the case may be, for claiming compensation for the 
harm caused to him; 
(36) "product manufacturer" means a person who— 
(i) makes any product or parts thereof; or 
(ii) assembles parts thereof made by others; or 
(iii) puts or causes to be put his own mark on any products made by any other person; or 
(iv) makes a product and sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares, packages, labels, markets, 
repairs, maintains such product or is otherwise involved in placing such product for commercial 
purpose; or 
(v) designs, produces, fabricates, constructs or re-manufactures any product before its sale; or 
(vi) being a product seller of a product, is also a manufacturer of such product; 
(37) "product seller", in relation to a product, means a person who, in the course of business, 
imports, sells, distributes, leases, installs, prepares, packages, labels, markets, repairs, maintains, or 
otherwise is involved in placing such product for commercial purpose and includes-- 
(i) a manufacturer who is also a product seller; or 
(ii) a service provider, 

9 
 
but does not include— 
(a) a seller of immovable property, unless such person is engaged in the sale of 
constructed house or in the construction of homes or flats; 
(b) a provider of professional services in any transaction in which, the sale or use of a 
product is only incidental thereto, but furnishing of opinion, skill or services being the 
essence of such transaction; 
(c) a person who— 
(I) acts only in a financial capacity with respect to the sale of the product; 
(II) is not a manufacturer, wholesaler, distributor, retailer, direct seller or an 
electronic service provider; 
(III) leases a product, without having a reasonable opportunity to inspect and 
discover defects in the product, under a lease arrangement in which the selection, 
possession, maintenance, and operation of the product are controlled by a person other 
than the lessor; 
(38) "product service provider", in relation to a product, means a person who provides any service 
in respect of such product; 
(39) "regulations" means the regulations made by the National Commission, or as the case may 
be, the Central Authority; 
(40) "Regulator" means a body or any authority established under any other law for the time 
being in force; 
(41) "restrictive trade practice" means a trade practice which tends to bring about manipulation of 
price or its conditions of delivery or to affect flow of supplies in the market relating to goods or 
services in such a manner as to impose on the consumers unjustified costs or restrictions and shall 
include-- 
(i) delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader in supply of such goods or in providing 
the services which has led or is likely to lead to rise in the price; 
(ii) any trade practice which requires a consumer to buy, hire or avail of any goods or, as 
the case may be, services as condition precedent for buying, hiring or availing of other goods 
or services; 
(42) "service" means service of any description which is made available to potential users and 
includes, but not limited to, the provision of facilities in connection with banking, financing, 
insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, telecom, boarding or 
lodging or both, housing construction, entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or 
other information, but does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or under a 
contract of personal service; 
(43) "spurious goods" means such goods which are falsely claimed to be genuine; 
(44) "State Commission" means a State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established under sub-section (1) of section 42; 
(45) "trader", in relation to any goods, means a person who sells or distributes any goods for 
sale and includes the manufacturer thereof, and where such goods are sold or distributed in 
package form, includes the packer thereof; 
(46) "unfair contract" means a contract between a manufacturer or trader or service provider 
on one hand, and a consumer on the other, having such terms which cause significant change in 
the rights of such consumer, including the following, namely:-- 
(i) requiring manifestly excessive security deposits to be given by a consumer for the 
performance of contractual obligations; or 

10 
 
(ii) imposing any penalty on the consumer, for the breach of contract thereof which is 
wholly disproportionate to the loss occurred due to such breach to the other party to the 
contract; or 
(iii) refusing to accept early repayment of debts on payment of applicable penalty; or 
(iv) entitling a party to the contract to terminate such contract unilaterally, without 
reasonable cause; or 
(v) permitting or has the effect of permitting one party to assign the contract to the 
detriment of the other party who is a consumer, without his consent; or 
(vi) imposing on the consumer any unreasonable charge, obligation or condition which 
puts such consumer to disadvantage; 
(47) "unfair trade practice" means a trade practice which, for the purpose of promoting the sale, 
use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or 
deceptive practice including any of the following practices, namely:— 
(i) making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by visible representation including 
by means of electronic record, which— 
(a) falsely represents that the goods are of a particular standard, quality, quantity, grade, 
composition, style or model; 
(b) falsely represents that the services are of a particular standard, quality or grade; 
(c) falsely represents any re-built, second-hand, renovated, reconditioned or old goods as 
new goods; 
(d) represents that the goods or services have sponsorship, approval, performance, 
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits which such goods or services do not have; 
(e) represents that the seller or the supplier has a sponsorship or approval or affiliation 
which such seller or supplier does not have; 
(f) makes a false or misleading representation concerning the need for, or the usefulness 
of, any goods or services; 
(g) gives to the public any warranty or guarantee of the performance, efficacy or length of 
life of a product or of any goods that is not based on an adequate or proper test thereof: 
Provided that where a defence is raised to the effect that such warranty or guarantee is 
based on adequate or proper test, the burden of proof of such defence shall lie on the person 
raising such defence; 
(h) makes to the public a representation in a form that purports to be— 
(A) a warranty or guarantee of a product or of any goods or services; or 
(B) a promise to replace, maintain or repair an article or any part thereof or to repeat 
or continue a service until it has achieved a specified result, if such purported warranty or 
guarantee or promise is materially misleading or if there is no reasonable prospect that 
such warranty, guarantee or promise will be carried out; 
(i) materially misleads the public concerning the price at which a product or like products or 
goods or services, have been or are, ordinarily sold or provided, and, for this purpose, a 
representation as to price shall be deemed to refer to the price at which the product or goods or 
services has or have been sold by sellers or provided by suppliers generally in the relevant market 
unless it is clearly specified to be the price at which the product has been sold or services have 
been provided by the person by whom or on whose behalf the representation is made; 
(j) gives false or misleading facts disparaging the goods, services or trade of another person. 
 

11 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause, a statement that is,— 
(A) expressed on an article offered or displayed for sale, or on its wrapper or container; or 
(B) expressed on anything attached to, inserted in, or accompanying, an article offered or 
displayed for sale, or on anything on which the article is mounted for display or sale; or 
(C) contained in or on anything that is sold, sent, delivered, transmitted or in any other 
manner whatsoever made available to a member of the public, 
shall be deemed to be a statement made to the public by, and only by, the person who had 
caused the statement to be so expressed, made or contained; 
(ii) permitting the publication of any advertisement, whether in any newspaper or otherwise, 
including by way of electronic record, for the sale or supply at a bargain price of goods or 
services that are not intended to be offered for sale or supply at the bargain price, or for a period 
that is, and in quantities that are, reasonable, having regard to the nature of the market in which 
the business is carried on, the nature and size of business, and the nature of the advertisement. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-clause, "bargain price" means,— 
(A) a price that is stated in any advertisement to be a bargain price, by reference to an 
ordinary price or otherwise; or 
(B) a price that a person who reads, hears or sees the advertisement, would reasonably 
understand to be a bargain price having regard to the prices at which the product advertised or 
like products are ordinarily sold; 
(iii) permitting— 
(a) the offering of gifts, prizes or other items with the intention of not providing them as 
offered or creating impression that something is being given or offered free of charge when it 
is fully or partly covered by the amount charged, in the transaction as a whole; 
(b) the conduct of any contest, lottery, game of chance or skill, for the purpose of 
promoting, directly or indirectly, the sale, use or supply of any product or any business 
interest, except such contest, lottery, game of chance or skill as may be prescribed; 
(c) withholding from the participants of any scheme offering gifts, prizes or other items 
free of charge on its closure, the information about final results of the scheme. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-clause, the participants of a scheme shall be 
deemed to have been informed of the final results of the scheme where such results are within 
a reasonable time published, prominently in the same newspaper in which the scheme was 
originally advertised; 
(iv) permitting the sale or supply of goods intended to be used, or are of a kind likely to 
be used by consumers, knowing or having reason to believe that the goods do not comply 
with the standards prescribed by the competent authority relating to performance, 
composition, contents, design, constructions, finishing or packaging as are necessary to 
prevent or reduce the risk of injury to the person using the goods; 
(v) permitting the hoarding or destruction of goods, or refusal to sell the goods or to make 
them available for sale or to provide any service, if such hoarding or destruction or refusal 
raises or tends to raise or is intended to raise, the cost of those or other similar goods or 
services; 
(vi) manufacturing of spurious goods or offering such goods for sale or adopting 
deceptive practices in the provision of services; 
(vii) not issuing bill or cash memo or receipt for the goods sold or services rendered in 
such manner as may be prescribed; 

12 
 
(viii) refusing, after selling goods or rendering services, to take back or withdraw 
defective goods or to withdraw or discontinue deficient services and to refund the 
consideration thereof, if paid, within the period stipulated in the bill or cash memo or receipt 
or in the absence of such stipulation, within a period of thirty days; 
(ix) disclosing to other person any personal information given in confidence by the 
consumer unless such disclosure is made in accordance with the provisions of any law for the 
time being in force. 
CHAPTER II 
CONSUMER PROTECTION COUNCILS 
3. Central Consumer Protection Council.—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish with effect from such date as it may specify in that notification, the Central Consumer Protection 
Council to be known as the Central Council. 
(2) The Central Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Minister-in-charge of the Department of Consumer Affairs in the Central Government, 
who shall be the Chairperson; and 
(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such interests as may be 
prescribed. 
4. Procedure for meetings of Central Council.—(1) The Central Council shall meet as and when 
necessary, but at least one meeting of the Council shall be held every year. 
(2) The Central Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit and shall 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be prescribed. 
5. Objects of Central Council.—The objects of the Central Council shall be to render advice on 
promotion and protection of the consumers' rights under this Act. 
6. State Consumer Protection Councils.—(1) Every State Government shall, by notification, 
establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a State Consumer Protection 
Council for such State to be known as the State Council. 
(2) The State Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members, namely:— 
(a) the Minister-in-charge of Consumer Affairs in the State Government who shall be the 
Chairperson; 
(b) such number of other official or non-official members representing such interests as may be 
prescribed; 
(c) such number of other official or non-official members, not exceeding ten, as may be 
nominated by the Central Government. 
(3) The State Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two meetings shall be held 
every year. 
(4) The State Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit and shall 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business, as may be prescribed. 
7. Objects of State Council.—The objects of every State Council shall be to render advice on 
promotion and protection of consumer rights under this Act within the State. 
8. District Consumer Protection Council.—(1) The State Government shall, by notification, 
establish for every District with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a District 
Consumer Protection Council to be known as the District Council. 
(2) The District Council shall be an advisory council and consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(a) the Collector of the district (by whatever name called), who shall be the Chairperson; and 

13 
 
(b) such number of other official and non-official members representing such interests as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The District Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two meetings shall be 
held every year. 
(4) The District Council shall meet at such time and place within the district as the Chairperson may 
think fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be prescribed. 
9. Objects of District Council.—The objects of every District Council shall be to render advice on 
promotion and protection of consumer rights under this Act within the district.  
CHAPTER III 
CENRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION AUTHORITY 
10. Establishment of Central Consumer Protection Authority.—(1) The Central Government 
shall, by notification, establish with effect from such date as it may specify in that notification, a Central 
Consumer Protection Authority to be known as the Central Authority to regulate matters relating to 
violation of rights of consumers, unfair trade practices and false or misleading advertisements which are 
prejudicial to the interests of public and consumers and to promote, protect and enforce the rights of 
consumers as a class. 
(2) The Central Authority shall consist of a Chief Commissioner and such number of other 
Commissioners as may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government to exercise the powers 
and discharge the functions under this Act. 
(3) The headquarters of the Central Authority shall be at such place in the National Capital Region of 
Delhi, and it shall have regional and other offices in any other place in India as the Central Government 
may decide. 
11. Qualifications, method of recruitment, etc., of Chief Commissioner and Commissioners.—
The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the qualifications for 
appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of the service of the Chief Commissioner and 
Commissioners of the Central Authority. 
12. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Central Authority.—No act or proceeding of 
the Central Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Authority; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chief Commissioner or as a 
Commissioner; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Central Authority not affecting the merits of the case. 
13. Appointment of officers, experts, professionals and other employees of Central Authority.—
(1) The Central Government shall provide the Central Authority such number of officers and other 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions under this Act. 
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the Central Authority appointed under this Act shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) The Central Authority may engage, in accordance with the procedure specified by regulations, 
such number of experts and professionals of integrity and ability, who have special knowledge and 
experience in the areas of consumer rights and welfare, consumer policy, law, medicine, food safety, 
health, engineering, product safety, commerce, economics, public affairs or administration, as it deems 
necessary to assist it in the discharge of its functions under this Act. 
14. Procedure of Central Authority. —(1) The Central Authority shall regulate the procedure for 
transaction of its business and allocation of its business amongst the Chief Commissioner and 
Commissioners as may be specified by regulations. 

14 
 
(2) The Chief Commissioner shall have the powers of general superintendence, direction and control 
in respect of all administrative matters of the Central Authority: 
Provided that the Chief Commissioner may delegate such of his powers relating to administrative 
matters of the Central Authority, as he may think fit, to any Commissioner (including Commissioner of a 
regional office) or any other officer of the Central Authority. 
15. Investigation Wing.—(1) The Central Authority shall have an Investigation Wing headed by a 
Director-General for the purpose of conducting inquiry or investigation under this Act as may be directed 
by the Central Authority. 
(2) The Central Government may appoint a Director-General and such number of Additional 
Director-General, Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant Director, from amongst persons 
who have experience in investigation and possess such qualifications, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) Every Additional Director-General, Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant 
Director shall exercise his powers, and discharge his functions, subject to the general control, supervision 
and direction of the Director-General. 
(4) The Director-General may delegate all or any of his powers to the Additional Director-General or 
Director, Joint Director or Deputy Director or Assistant Director, as the case may be, while conducting 
inquiries or investigations under this Act. 
(5) The inquiries or the investigations made by the Director-General shall be submitted to the Central 
Authority in such form, in such manner and within such time, as may be specified by regulations. 
16.  Power of District Collector.—The District Collector (by whatever name called) may, on a 
complaint or on a reference made to him by the Central Authority or the Commissioner of a regional 
office, inquire into or investigate complaints regarding violation of rights of consumers as a class, on 
matters relating to violations of consumer rights, unfair trade practices and false or misleading 
advertisements, within his jurisdiction and submit his report to the Central Authority or to the 
Commissioner of a regional office, as the case may be. 
17. Complaints to authorities.—A complaint relating to violation of consumer rights or unfair trade 
practices or false or misleading advertisements which are prejudicial to the interests of consumers as a 
class, may be forwarded either in writing or in electronic mode, to any one of the authorities, namely, the 
District Collector or the Commissioner of regional office or the Central Authority. 
18. Powers and functions of Central Authority.—(1) The Central Authority shall— 
(a) protect, promote and enforce the rights of consumers as a class, and prevent violation of 
consumers rights under this Act; 
(b) prevent unfair trade practices and ensure that no person engages himself in unfair trade 
practices; 
(c) ensure that no false or misleading advertisement is made of any goods or services which 
contravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder; 
(d) ensure that no person takes part in the publication of any advertisement which is false or 
misleading. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the Central 
Authority may, for any of the purposes aforesaid,-- 
(a) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made into violations of consumer rights or 
unfair trade practices, either suo motu or on a complaint received or on the directions from the Central 
Government; 
(b) file complaints before the District Commission, the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, under this Act; 

15 
 
(c) intervene in any proceedings before the District Commission or the State Commission or the 
National Commission, as the case may be, in respect of any allegation of violation of consumer rights 
or unfair trade practices; 
(d) review the matters relating to, and the factors inhibiting enjoyment of, consumer rights, 
including safeguards provided for the protection of consumers under any other law for the time being 
in force and recommend appropriate remedial measures for their effective implementation; 
(e) recommend adoption of international covenants and best international practices on consumer 
rights to ensure effective enforcement of consumer rights; 
(f) undertake and promote research in the field of consumer rights; 
(g) spread and promote awareness on consumer rights; 
(h) encourage non-Governmental organisations and other institutions working in the field of 
consumer rights to co-operate and work with consumer protection agencies; 
(i) mandate the use of unique and universal goods identifiers in such goods, as may be necessary, 
to prevent unfair trade practices and to protect consumers' interest; 
(j) issue safety notices to alert consumers against dangerous or hazardous or unsafe goods or 
services; 
(k) advise the Ministries and Departments of the Central and State Governments on consumer 
welfare measures; 
(l) issue necessary guidelines to prevent unfair trade practices and protect consumers' interest.  
19. Power of Central Authority to refer matter for investigation or to other Regulator.—(1) The 
Central Authority may, after receiving any information or complaint or directions from the Central 
Government or of its own motion, conduct or cause to be conducted a preliminary inquiry as to whether 
there exists a prima facie case of violation of consumer rights or any unfair trade practice or any false or 
misleading advertisement, by any person, which is prejudicial to the public interest or to the interests of 
consumers and if it is satisfied that there exists a prima facie case, it shall cause investigation to be made 
by the Director-General or by the District Collector. 
(2) Where, after preliminary inquiry, the Central Authority is of the opinion that the matter is to be 
dealt with by a Regulator established under any other law for the time being in force, it may refer such 
matter to the concerned Regulator along with its report. 
(3) For the purposes of investigation under sub-section (1), the Central Authority, the Director 
General or the District Collector may call upon a person referred to in sub-section (1) and also direct him 
to produce any document or record in his possession. 
20. Power of Central Authority to recall goods, etc.—Where the Central Authority is satisfied on 
the basis of investigation that there is sufficient evidence to show violation of consumer rights or unfair 
trade practice by a person, it may pass such order as may be necessary, including— 
(a) recalling of goods or withdrawal of services which are dangerous, hazardous or unsafe; 
(b) reimbursement of the prices of goods or services so recalled to purchasers of such goods or 
services; and 
(c) discontinuation of practices which are unfair and prejudicial to consumers' interest: 
Provided that the Central Authority shall give the person an opportunity of being heard before passing 
an order under this section. 
21. Power of Central Authority to issue directions and penalties against false or misleading 
advertisements.—(1) Where the Central Authority is satisfied after investigation that any advertisement 
is false or misleading and is prejudicial to the interest of any consumer or is in contravention of consumer 
rights, it may, by order, issue directions to the concerned trader or manufacturer or endorser or advertiser 

16 
 
or publisher, as the case may be, to discontinue such advertisement or to modify the same in such manner 
and within such time as may be specified in that order. 
(2) Notwithstanding the order passed under sub-section (1), if the Central Authority is of the opinion 
that it is necessary to impose a penalty in respect of such false or misleading advertisement, by a 
manufacturer or an endorser, it may, by order, impose on manufacturer or endorser a penalty which may 
extend to ten lakh rupees: 
Provided that the Central Authority may, for every subsequent contravention by a manufacturer or 
endorser, impose a penalty, which may extend to fifty lakh rupees. 
(3) Notwithstanding any order under sub-sections (1) and (2), where the Central Authority deems it 
necessary, it may, by order, prohibit the endorser of a false or misleading advertisement from making 
endorsement of any product or service for a period which may extend to one year: 
Provided that the Central Authority may, for every subsequent contravention, prohibit such endorser 
from making endorsement in respect of any product or service for a period which may extend to three 
years. 
(4) Where the Central Authority is satisfied after investigation that any person is found to publish, or 
is a party to the publication of, a misleading advertisement, it may impose on such person a penalty which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees. 
(5) No endorser shall be liable to a penalty under sub-sections (2) and (3) if he has exercised due 
diligence to verify the veracity of the claims made in the advertisement regarding the product or service 
being endorsed by him. 
(6) No person shall be liable to such penalty if he proves that he had published or arranged for the 
publication of such advertisement in the ordinary course of his business: 
Provided that no such defence shall be available to such person if he had previous knowledge of the 
order passed by the Central Authority for withdrawal or modification of such advertisement. 
(7) While determining the penalty under this section, regard shall be had to the following, namely: — 
(a) the population and the area impacted or affected by such offence; 
(b) the frequency and duration of such offence; 
(c) the vulnerability of the class of persons likely to be adversely affected by such offence; and 
(d) the gross revenue from the sales effected by virtue of such offence. 
(8) The Central Authority shall give the person an opportunity of being heard before an order under 
this section is passed. 
22. Search and seizure.—(1) For the purpose of conducting an investigation after preliminary 
inquiry under sub-section (1) of section 19, the Director-General or any other officer authorised by him in 
this behalf, or the District Collector, as the case may be, may, if he has any reason to believe that any 
person has violated any consumer rights or committed unfair trade practice or causes any false or 
misleading advertisement to be made, shall,-- 
(a) enter at any reasonable time into any such premises and search for any document or record or 
article or any other form of evidence and seize such document, record, article or such evidence; 
(b) make a note or an inventory of such record or article; or 
(c) require any person to produce any record, register or other document or article. 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to search and seizure 
shall apply, as far as may be, for search and seizure under this Act. 
(3) Every document, record or article seized under clause (a) of sub-section (1) or produced under 
clause (c) of that sub-section shall be returned to the person, from whom they were seized or who 
produced the same, within a period of twenty days of the date of such seizure or production, as the case 

17 
 
may be, after copies thereof or extracts therefrom certified by that person, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, have been taken. 
(4) Where any article seized under sub-section (1) are subject to speedy or natural decay, the 
Director-General or such other officer may dispose of the article in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(5) In the case of articles other than the articles referred to in sub-section (4), provisions contained in 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38 shall mutatis mutandis apply in relation to analysis or tests. 
23. Designation of any statutory authority or body to function as Central Authority.—The 
Central Government may, if it considers necessary, by notification, designate any statutory authority or 
body to exercise the powers and perform the functions of the Central Authority referred to in section 10. 
24. Appeal.—A person aggrieved by any order passed by the Central Authority under sections 20 and 
21 may file an appeal to the National Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt 
of such order. 
25. Grants by Central Government.—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Central Authority grants of such sums of money as that 
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 
26. Accounts and audit.—(1) The Central Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Central Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such 
audit shall be payable by the Central Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Central Authority shall have the same rights, privileges 
and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally 
has, in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Central Authority. 
(4) The accounts of the Central Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government which shall cause the same to be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 
27. Furnishing of annual reports, etc.—(1) The Central Authority shall prepare once in every year, 
in such form, manner and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving full account of its 
activities during the previous year and such other reports and returns, as may be directed, and copies of 
such report and returns shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 
(2) A copy of the annual report received under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is received, before each House of Parliament. 
CHAPTER IV 
CONSUMER DISPUTER REDRESSAL COMMISSION 
28. Establishment of District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.—(1) The State 
Government shall, by notification, establish a District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to be 
known as the District Commission, in each district of the State: 
Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one District Commission 
in a district. 
(2) Each District Commission shall consist of— 
(a) a President; and 

18 
 
(b) not less than two and not more than such number of members as may be prescribed, in 
consultation with the Central Government. 
29. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of District Commission.—The Central 
Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the qualifications, method of recruitment, 
procedure for appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the President and members of the 
District Commission. 
30. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of President and members of 
District Commission.—The State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for salaries 
and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President, and members of the District 
Commission. 
31. Transitional provision.—Any person appointed as President or, as the case may be, a member of 
the District Commission immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold office as such as 
President or, as the case may be, as member till the completion of his term for which he has been 
appointed. 
32. Vacancy in office of member of District Commission.—If, at any time, there is a vacancy in the 
office of the President or member of a District Commission, the State Government may, by notification, 
direct— 
(a) any other District Commission specified in that notification to exercise the jurisdiction in 
respect of that district also; or 
(b) the President or a member of any other District Commission specified in that notification to 
exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the President or member of that District 
Commission also. 
33. Officers and other employees of District Commission.—(1) The State Government shall 
provide the District Commission with such officers and other employees as may be required to assist the 
District Commission in the discharge of its functions. 
(2) The officers and other employees of the District Commission shall discharge their functions under 
the general superintendence of the President of the District Commission. 
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the District Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
34. Jurisdiction of District Commission.—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
District Commission shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or 
services paid as consideration does not exceed one crore rupees: 
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe such other 
value, as it deems fit. 
(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a District Commission within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction,— 
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time 
of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily resides or carries on business or has a branch office or 
personally works for gain; or 
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the institution of the 
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or has a branch office, or personally 
works for gain, provided that in such case the permission of the District Commission is given; or 
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or 
(d) the complainant resides or personally works for gain. 

19 
 
(3) The District Commission shall ordinarily function in the district headquarters and may perform its 
functions at such other place in the district, as the State Government may, in consultation with the State 
Commission, notify in the Official Gazette from time to time. 
35. Manner in which complaint shall be made.—(1) A complaint, in relation to any goods sold or 
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided, may be filed 
with a District Commission by— 
(a) the consumer,— 
(i) to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or such service 
is provided or agreed to be provided; or 
(ii) who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of such goods or service; 
(b) any recognised consumer association, whether the consumer to whom such goods are sold or 
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or such service is provided or agreed to be provided, or 
who alleges unfair trade practice in respect of such goods or service, is a member of such association 
or not; 
(c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the same interest, with 
the permission of the District Commission, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all consumers so 
interested; or 
(d) the Central Government, the Central Authority or the State Government, as the case may be: 
Provided that the complaint under this sub-section may be filed electronically in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "recognised consumer association" means any 
voluntary consumer association registered under any law for the time being in force. 
(2) Every complaint filed under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied with such fee and payable in 
such manner, including electronic form, as may be prescribed. 
36. Proceedings before District Commission.—(1) Every proceeding before the District 
Commission shall be conducted by the President of that Commission and atleast one member thereof, 
sitting together: 
Provided that where a member, for any reason, is unable to conduct a proceeding till it is completed, 
the President and the other member shall continue the proceeding from the stage at which it was last heard 
by the previous member. 
(2) On receipt of a complaint made under section 35, the District Commission may, by order, admit 
the complaint for being proceeded with or reject the same: 
Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected under this section unless an opportunity of being heard 
has been given to the complainant: 
Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided within twenty-one 
days from the date on which the complaint was filed. 
(3) Where the District Commission does not decide the issue of admissibility of the complaint within 
the period so specified, it shall be deemed to have been admitted. 
37.  Reference to mediation.—(1) At the first hearing of the complaint after its admission, or at any 
later stage, if it appears to the District Commission that there exists elements of a settlement which may 
be acceptable to the parties, except in such cases as may be prescribed, it may direct the parties to give in 
writing, within five days, consent to have their dispute settled by mediation in accordance with the 
provisions of Chapter V. 
(2) Where the parties agree for settlement by mediation and give their consent in writing, the District 
Commission shall, within five days of receipt of such consent, refer the matter for mediation, and in such 
case, the provisions of Chapter V, relating to mediation, shall apply. 

20 
 
38. Procedure on admission of complaint.—(1) The District Commission shall, on admission of a 
complaint, or in respect of cases referred for mediation on failure of settlement by mediation, proceed 
with such complaint. 
(2) Where the complaint relates to any goods, the District Commission shall,— 
(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within twenty-one days from the date of its admission 
to the opposite party mentioned in the complaint directing him to give his version of the case within a 
period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may be granted by it; 
(b) if the opposite party on receipt of a complaint referred to him under clause (a) denies or 
disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or omits or fails to take any action to represent his 
case within the time given by the District Commission, proceed to settle the consumer dispute in the 
manner specified in clauses (c) to (g); 
(c) if the complaint alleges a defect in the goods which cannot be determined without proper 
analysis or test of the goods, obtain a sample of the goods from the complainant, seal it and 
authenticate it in the manner as may be prescribed and refer the sample so sealed to the appropriate 
laboratory along with a direction that such laboratory to make an analysis or test, whichever may be 
necessary, with a view to finding out whether such goods suffer from any defect alleged in the 
complaint or from any other defect and to report its findings thereon to the District Commission 
within a period of forty-five days of the receipt of the reference or within such extended period as 
may be granted by it; 
(d) before any sample of the goods is referred to any appropriate laboratory under clause (c), 
require the complainant to deposit to the credit of the Commission such fees as may be specified, for 
payment to the appropriate laboratory for carrying out the necessary analysis or test in relation to the 
goods in question; 
(e) remit the amount deposited to its credit under clause (d) to the appropriate laboratory to enable 
it to carry out the analysis or test mentioned in clause (c) and on receipt of the report from the 
appropriate laboratory, it shall forward a copy of the report along with such remarks as it may feel 
appropriate to the opposite party; 
(f) if any of the parties disputes the correctness of the findings of the appropriate laboratory, or 
disputes the correctness of the methods of analysis or test adopted by the appropriate laboratory, 
require the opposite party or the complainant to submit in writing his objections with regard to the 
report made by the appropriate laboratory; 
(g) give a reasonable opportunity to the complainant as well as the opposite party of being heard 
as to the correctness or otherwise of the report made by the appropriate laboratory and also as to the 
objection made in relation thereto under clause (f) and issue an appropriate order under section 39. 
(3) The District Commission shall, if the complaint admitted by it under sub-section (2) of section 36 
relates to goods in respect of which the procedure specified in sub-section (2) cannot be followed, or if 
the complaint relates to any services,— 
(a) refer a copy of such complaint to the opposite party directing him to give his version of the 
case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may be 
granted by the District Commission; 
(b) if the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of the complaint, referred to him under clause (a) 
denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or omits or fails to take any action to 
represent his case within the time given by the District Commission, it shall proceed to settle the 
consumer dispute— 
(i) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complainant and the opposite party, if 
the opposite party denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or 
(ii) ex parte on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complainant, where the 
opposite party omits or fails to take any action to represent his case within the time given by the 
Commission; 

21 
 
(c) decide the complaint on merits if the complainant fails to appear on the date of hearing. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-sections (2) and (3), the District Commission may, by order, require an 
electronic service provider to provide such information, documents or records, as may be specified in that 
order. 
(5) No proceedings complying with the procedure laid down in [sub-sections (2) and (3)] shall be 
called in question in any court on the ground that the principles of natural justice have not been complied 
with. 
(6) Every complaint shall be heard by the District Commission on the basis of affidavit and 
documentary evidence placed on record: 
Provided that where an application is made for hearing or for examination of parties in person or 
through video conferencing, the District Commission may, on sufficient cause being shown, and after 
recording its reasons in writing, allow the same. 
(7) Every complaint shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to 
decide the complaint within a period of three months from the date of receipt of notice by opposite party 
where the complaint does not require analysis or testing of commodities and within five months if it 
requires analysis or testing of commodities: 
Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the District Commission unless sufficient 
cause is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by the 
Commission: 
Provided further that the District Commission shall make such orders as to the costs occasioned by 
the adjournment as may be specified by regulations: 
Provided also that in the event of a complaint being disposed of after the period so specified, the 
District Commission shall record in writing, the reasons for the same at the time of disposing of the said 
complaint. 
(8) Where during the pendency of any proceeding before the District Commission, if it appears 
necessary, it may pass such interim order as is just and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case. 
(9) For the purposes of this section, the District Commission shall have the same powers as are vested 
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters, namely:— 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any defendant or witness and examining the 
witness on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document or other material object as evidence; 
(c) receiving of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the requisitioning of the report of the concerned analysis or test from the appropriate 
laboratory or from any other relevant source; 
(e) issuing of commissions for the examination of any witness, or document; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(10) Every proceeding before the District Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of section 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the District 
Commission shall be deemed to be a criminal court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
(11) Where the complainant is a consumer referred to in sub-clause (v) of clause (5) of section 2, the 
provisions of Order I Rule 8 of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall 
apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to a suit or decree shall be construed as a 
reference to a complaint or the order of the District Commission thereon. 

22 
 
(12) In the event of death of a complainant who is a consumer or of the opposite party against whom 
the complaint has been filed, the provisions of Order XXII of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to the 
plaintiff and the defendant shall be construed as reference to a complainant or the opposite party, as the 
case may be. 
39. Findings of District Commission.—(1) Where the District Commission is satisfied that the 
goods complained against suffer from any of the defects specified in the complaint or that any of the 
allegations contained in the complaint about the services or any unfair trade practices, or claims for 
compensation under product liability are proved, it shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him 
to do one or more of the following, namely:— 
(a) to remove the defect pointed out by the appropriate laboratory from the goods in question; 
(b) to replace the goods with new goods of similar description which shall be free from any 
defect; 
(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may be, the charges paid by the 
complainant along with such interest on such price or charges as may be decided; 
(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer for any loss or 
injury suffered by the consumer due to the negligence of the opposite party: 
Provided that the District Commission shall have the power to grant punitive damages in such 
circumstances as it deems fit; 
(e) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation in a product liability action 
under Chapter VI; 
(f) to remove the defects in goods or deficiencies in the services in question; 
(g) to discontinue the unfair trade practice or restrictive trade practice and not to repeat them; 
(h) not to offer the hazardous or unsafe goods for sale; 
(i) to withdraw the hazardous goods from being offered for sale; 
(j) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from offering services which are 
hazardous in nature; 
(k) to pay such sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss or injury has been 
suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiable conveniently: 
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be less than twenty-five per cent. 
of the value of such defective goods sold or service provided, as the case may be, to such consumers; 
(l) to issue corrective advertisement to neutralise the effect of misleading advertisement at the 
cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing such misleading advertisement; 
(m) to provide for adequate costs to parties; and 
(n) to cease and desist from issuing any misleading advertisement. 
(2) Any amount obtained under sub-section (1) shall be credited to such fund and utilised in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) In any proceeding conducted by the President and a member and if they differ on any point or 
points, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and refer the same to another member for 
hearing on such point or points and the opinion of the majority shall be the order of the District 
Commission: 
Provided that the other member shall give his opinion on such point or points referred to him within a 
period of one month from the date of such reference. 
(4) Every order made by the District Commission under sub-section (1) shall be signed by the 
President and the member who conducted the proceeding: 

23 
 
Provided that where the order is made as per majority opinion under sub-section (3), such order shall 
also be signed by the other member. 
40. Review by District Commission in certain cases.—The District Commission shall have the 
power to review any of the order passed by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either 
of its own motion or on an application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order. 
41. Appeal against order of District Commission.—Any person aggrieved by an order made by the 
District Commission may prefer an appeal against such order to the State Commission on the grounds of 
facts or law within a period of forty-five days from the date of the order, in such form and manner, as may 
be prescribed: 
Provided that the State Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty-five days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period: 
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of 
the District Commission, shall be entertained by the State Commission unless the appellant has deposited 
fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided also that no appeal shall lie from any order passed under sub-section (1) of section 81 by the 
District Commission pursuant to a settlement by mediation under section 80. 
42. Establishment of State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.—(1) The State 
Government shall, by notification, establish a State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to be 
known as the State Commission, in the State. 
(2) The State Commission shall ordinarily function at the State capital and perform its functions at 
such other places as the State Government may in consultation with the State Commission notify in the 
Official Gazette: 
Provided that the State Government may, by notification, establish regional benches of the State 
Commission, at such places, as it deems fit. 
(3) Each State Commission shall consist of— 
(a) a President; and 
(b) not less than four or not more than such number of members as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Central Government. 
43. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of State Commission.—The Central 
Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the qualification for appointment, method of 
recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of office, resignation and removal of the President and 
members of the State Commission. 
44. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of President and members of 
State Commission.—The State Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for salaries and 
allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the State 
Commission. 
45. Transitional provision.—Any person appointed as President or, as the case may be, a member of 
the State Commission immediately before the commencement of this Act shall hold office as such, as 
President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his term. 
46. Officers and employees of State Commission.—(1) The State Government shall determine the 
nature and categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the State Commission in the 
discharge of its functions and provide the Commission with such officers and other employees as it may 
think fit. 
(2) The officers and other employees of the State Commission shall discharge their functions under 
the general superintendence of the President. 
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the State Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 

24 
 
47. Jurisdiction of State Commission.—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the State 
Commission shall have jurisdiction— 
(a) to entertain— 
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as consideration, exceeds rupees 
one crore, but does not exceed rupees ten crore: 
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe 
such other value, as it deems fit; 
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or services paid as 
consideration does not exceed ten crore rupees; 
(iii) appeals against the orders of any District Commission within the State; and 
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending 
before or has been decided by any District Commission within the State, where it appears to the State 
Commission that such District Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has 
failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested or has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with 
material irregularity. 
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the State Commission may be exercised by Benches 
thereof, and a Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members as the President may 
deem fit: 
Provided that the senior-most member shall preside over the Bench. 
(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are equally divided, 
they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall 
either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more 
of the other members and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of 
the members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it: 
Provided that the President or the other members, as the case may be, shall give opinion on the point 
or points so referred within a period of one month from the date of such reference. 
(4) A complaint shall be instituted in a State Commission within the limits of whose jurisdiction,-- 
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time 
of the institution of the complaint, ordinarily resides or carries on business or has a branch office or 
personally works for gain; or 
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the institution of 
the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or has a branch office or 
personally works for gain, provided in such case, the permission of the State Commission is given; 
or 
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises; or 
(d) the complainant resides or personally works for gain. 
48. Transfer of cases.—On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the State 
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, transfer any complaint pending before a District 
Commission to another District Commission within the State if the interest of justice so requires. 
49. Procedure applicable to State Commission.—(1) The provisions relating to complaints under 
sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall, with such modifications as may be necessary, be applicable to the 
disposal of complaints by the State Commission. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the State Commission may also declare any 
terms of contract, which is unfair to any consumer, to be null and void. 

25 
 
50. Review by State Commission in certain cases.—The State Commission shall have the power to 
review any of the order passed by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either of its own 
motion or on an application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order. 
51. Appeal to National Commission.—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State 
Commission in exercise of its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of 
section 47 may prefer an appeal against such order to the National Commission within a period of thirty 
days from the date of the order in such form and manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the National Commission shall not entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said 
period of thirty days unless it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period: 
Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of 
the State Commission, shall be entertained by the National Commission unless the appellant has 
deposited fifty per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act or by any other law for the time being in 
force, an appeal shall lie to the National Commission from any order passed in appeal by any State 
Commission, if the National Commission is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law. 
(3) In an appeal involving a question of law, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely state the 
substantial question of law involved in the appeal. 
(4) Where the National Commission is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any 
case, it shall formulate that question and hear the appeal on that question: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the power of the 
National Commission to hear, for reasons to be recorded in writing, the appeal on any other substantial 
question of law, if it is satisfied that the case involves such question of law. 
(5) An appeal may lie to the National Commission under this section from an order passed ex parte 
by the State Commission. 
52. Hearing of appeal.—An appeal filed before the State Commission or the National Commission, 
as the case may be, shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and every endeavour shall be made to 
dispose of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its admission: 
Provided that no adjournment shall ordinarily be granted by the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, unless sufficient cause is shown and the reasons for grant of 
adjournment have been recorded in writing by such Commission: 
Provided further that the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall 
make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the adjournment, as may be specified by regulations: 
Provided also that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period so specified, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record in writing the reasons for the 
same at the time of disposing of the said appeal. 
53. Establishment of National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission.—(1) The Central 
Government shall, by notification, establish a National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, to be 
known as the National Commission. 
(2) The National Commission shall ordinarily function at the National Capital Region and perform its 
functions at such other places as the Central Government may in consultation with the National 
Commission notify in the Official Gazette: 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, establish regional Benches of the 
National Commission, at such places, as it deems fit. 
54. Composition of National Commission.—The National Commission shall consist of— 
(a) a President; and 
(b) not less than four and not more than such number of members as may be prescribed. 

26 
 
55. Qualifications, etc., of President and members of National Commission.—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for qualifications, appointment, term of office, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the President 
and members of the National Commission: 
Provided that the President and members of the National Commission shall hold office for such term 
as specified in the rules made by the Central Government but not exceeding five years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided further that no President or members shall hold office as such after he has attained such age 
as specified in the rules made by the Central Government which shall not exceed,— 
(a) in the case of the President, the age of seventy years; 
(b) in the case of any other member, the age of sixty-seven years. 
(2) Neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of President and 
members of the National Commission shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
56. Transitional provision.—The President and every other member appointed immediately before 
the commencement of section 177 of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017) shall continue to be governed by 
the provisions of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) and the rules made there under as if 
this Act had not come into force. 
57. Other officers and employees of National Commission.—(1) The Central Government shall 
provide, in consultation with the President of the National Commission, such number of officers and other 
employees to assist the National Commission in the discharge of its functions as it may think fit. 
(2) The officers and other employees of the National Commission shall discharge their functions 
under the general superintendence of the President of the National Commission. 
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the National Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
58. Jurisdiction of National Commission.—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
National Commission shall have jurisdiction— 
(a) to entertain— 
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services paid as consideration exceeds rupees 
ten crore: 
Provided that where the Central Government deems it necessary so to do, it may prescribe 
such other value, as it deems fit; 
(ii) complaints against unfair contracts, where the value of goods or services paid as 
consideration exceeds ten crore rupees; 
(iii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission; 
(iv) appeals against the orders of the Central Authority; and 
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending 
before or has been decided by any State Commission where it appears to the National Commission 
that such State Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to 
exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with 
material irregularity. 
(2) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the National Commission may be exercised by Benches 
thereof and a Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members as he may deem fit: 
Provided that the senior-most member of the Bench shall preside over the Bench. 
(3) Where the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be decided 
according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are equally divided, 

27 
 
they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall 
either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more 
of the other members and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of 
the members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it: 
Provided that the President or the other member, as the case may be, shall give opinion on the point or 
points so referred within a period of two months from the date of such reference. 
59. Procedure applicable to National Commission.—(1) The provisions relating to complaints 
under sections 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39 shall, with such modifications as may be considered necessary, be 
applicable to the disposal of complaints by the National Commission. 
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the National Commission may also declare any terms of 
contract, which is unfair to any consumer to be null and void. 
60. Review by National Commission in certain cases.—The National Commission shall have the 
power to review any of the order passed by it if there is an error apparent on the face of the record, either 
of its own motion or on an application made by any of the parties within thirty days of such order. 
61. Power to set aside ex parte orders.—Where an order is passed by the National Commission ex 
parte, the aggrieved party may make an application to the Commission for setting aside such order. 
62. Transfer of cases.—On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the National 
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer any complaint pending 
before the District Commission of one State to a District Commission of another State or before one State 
Commission to another State Commission. 
63. Vacancy in office of President of National Commission.—When the office of President of the 
National Commission is vacant or a person occupying such office is, by reason of absence or otherwise, 
unable to perform the duties of his office, these shall be performed by the senior-most member of the 
National Commission: 
Provided that where a retired Judge of a High Court or a person who has been a Judicial Member is a 
member of the National Commission, such member or where the number of such members is more than 
one, the senior-most person amongst such members, shall preside over the National Commission in the 
absence of President of that Commission. 
64. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to invalidate orders.—No act or proceeding of the 
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission shall be invalid by reason only 
of the existence of any vacancy amongst its members or any defect in the constitution thereof. 
65. Service of notice, etc.—(1) All notices, required by this Act to be served, shall be served by 
delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by registered post acknowledgment due addressed to opposite 
party against whom complaint is made or to the complainant by speed post or by such courier service, 
approved by the District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case 
may be, or by any other mode of transmission of documents including electronic means. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), the notice required by this Act 
may be served on an electronic service provider at the address provided by it on the electronic platform 
from where it provides its services as such and for this purpose, the electronic service provider shall 
designate a nodal officer to accept and process such notices. 
(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the opposite party or his 
agent or, as the case may be, by the complainant is received by the District Commission, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, or postal article containing the notice is 
received back by such District Commission, State Commission or the National Commission, with an 
endorsement purporting to have been made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by the 
courier service to the effect that the opposite party or his agent or complainant had refused to take 
delivery of the postal article containing the notice or had refused to accept the notice by any other means 
specified in sub-section (1) when tendered or transmitted to him, the District Commission or the State 

28 
 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall declare that the notice has been duly 
served on the opposite party or to the complainant, as the case may be: 
Provided that where the notice was properly addressed, pre-paid and duly sent by registered post 
acknowledgment due, a declaration referred to in this sub-section shall be made notwithstanding the fact 
that the acknowledgment has been lost or misplaced, or for any other reason, has not been received by the 
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, within 
thirty days from the date of issue of notice. 
(4) All notices required to be served on an opposite party or to complainant, as the case may be, shall 
be deemed to be sufficiently served, if addressed in the case of the opposite party, to the place where 
business or profession is carried on, and in case of the complainant, the place where such person actually 
and voluntarily resides. 
66. Experts to assist National Commission or State Commission.—Where the National 
Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be, on an application by a complainant or 
otherwise, is of the opinion that it involves the larger interest of consumers, it may direct any individual 
or organisation or expert to assist the National Commission or the State Commission, as the case may be. 
67. Appeal against order of National Commission.—Any person, aggrieved by an order made by 
the National Commission in exercise of its powers conferred by sub-clause (i) or (ii) of clause (a) of             
sub-section (1) of section 58, may prefer an appeal against such order to the Supreme Court within a 
period of thirty days from the date of the order: 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period: 
Provided further that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order of 
the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme Court unless that person has deposited fifty 
per cent. of that amount in the manner as may be prescribed. 
68. Finality of orders.—Every order of a District Commission or the State Commission or the 
National Commission, as the case may be, shall, if no appeal has been preferred against such order under 
the provisions of this Act, be final. 
69. Limitation period.—(1) The District Commission, the State Commission or the National 
Commission shall not admit a complaint unless it is filed within two years from the date on which the 
cause of action has arisen. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a complaint may be entertained after the 
period specified in sub-section (1), if the complainant satisfies the District Commission, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, that he had sufficient cause for not filing 
the complaint within such period: 
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, records its reasons for condoning such 
delay. 
70. Administrative control.—(1) The National Commission shall have the authority to lay down 
such adequate standards in consultation with the Central Government from time to time, for better 
protection of the interests of consumers and for that purpose, shall have administrative control over all the 
State Commissions in the following matters, namely:— 
(a) monitoring performance of the State Commissions in terms of their disposal by calling for 
periodical returns regarding the institution, disposal and pendency of cases; 
(b) investigating into any allegations against the President and members of a State Commission 
and submitting inquiry report to the State Government concerned along with copy endorsed to the 
Central Government for necessary action; 

29 
 
(c) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of uniform procedure in the hearing of matters, 
prior service of copies of documents produced by one party to the opposite parties, furnishing of 
english translation of judgments written in any language, speedy grant of copies of documents; 
(d) overseeing the functioning of the State Commission or the District Commission either by way 
of inspection or by any other means, as the National Commission may like to order from time to time, 
to ensure that the objects and purposes of the Act are best served and the standards set by the National 
Commission are implemented without interfering with their quasi-judicial freedom. 
(2) There shall be a monitoring cell to be constituted by the President of the National Commission to 
oversee the functioning of the State Commissions from the administrative point of view. 
(3) The State Commission shall have administrative control over all the District Commissions within 
its jurisdiction in all matters referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4) The National Commission and the State Commissions shall furnish to the Central Government 
periodically or as and when required, any information including the pendency of cases in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(5) The State Commission shall furnish, periodically or as and when required to the State Government 
any information including pendency of cases in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 
71. Enforcement of orders of District Commission, State Commission and National 
Commission.—Every order made by a District Commission, State Commission or the National 
Commission shall be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a Court in a suit 
before it and the provisions of Order XXI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908) shall, as far as may be, applicable, subject to the modification that every reference therein to the 
decree shall be construed as reference to the order made under this Act. 
72. Penalty for non-compliance of order.—(1) Whoever fails to comply with any order made by the 
District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month, but which may extend to 
three years, or with fine, which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees, but which may extend 
to one lakh rupees, or with both. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall have 
the power of a Judicial Magistrate of first class for the trial of offences under sub-section (1), and on 
conferment of such powers, the District Commission or the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be a Judicial Magistrate of first class for the 
purposes of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided, the offences under sub-section (1) shall be tried summarily by the 
District Commission or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be. 
73. Appeal against order passed under section 72.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), where an order is passed under sub-section (1) of section 
72, an appeal shall lie, both on facts and on law from— 
(a) the order made by the District Commission to the State Commission; 
(b) the order made by the State Commission to the National Commission; and 
(c) the order made by the National Commission to the Supreme Court. 
(2) Except as provided in sub-section (1), no appeal shall lie before any court, from any order of a 
District Commission or a State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be. 
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
order of a District Commission or a State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be: 

30 
 
Provided that the State Commission or the National Commission or the Supreme Court, as the case 
may be, may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the 
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the said period of thirty days. 
CHAPTER V 
MEDIATION 
74. Establishment of consumer mediation cell.—(1) The State Government shall establish, by 
notification, a consumer mediation cell to be attached to each of the District Commissions and the State 
Commissions of that State. 
(2) The Central Government shall establish, by notification, a consumer mediation cell to be attached 
to the National Commission and each of the regional Benches. 
(3) A consumer mediation cell shall consist of such persons as may be prescribed. 
(4) Every consumer mediation cell shall maintain— 
(a) a list of empanelled mediators; 
(b) a list of cases handled by the cell; 
(c) record of proceeding; and 
(d) any other information as may be specified by regulations. 
(5) Every consumer mediation cell shall submit a quarterly report to the District Commission, State 
Commission or the National Commission to which it is attached, in the manner specified by regulations. 
75. Empanelment of mediators.—(1) For the purpose of mediation, the National Commission or the 
State Commission or the District Commission, as the case may be, shall prepare a panel of the mediators 
to be maintained by the consumer mediation cell attached to it, on the recommendation of a selection 
committee consisting of the President and a member of that Commission. 
(2) The qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the procedure for 
empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee payable to empanelled mediator, the 
terms and conditions for empanelment, the code of conduct for empanelled mediators, the grounds on 
which, and the manner in which, empanelled mediators shall be removed or empanelment shall be 
cancelled and other matters relating thereto, shall be such as may be specified by regulations. 
(3) The panel of mediators prepared under sub-section (1) shall be valid for a period of five years, and 
the empanelled mediators shall be eligible to be considered for re-empanelment for another term, subject 
to such conditions as may be specified by regulations. 
76.  Nomination of mediators from panel.—The District Commission, the State Commission or the 
National Commission shall, while nominating any person from the panel of mediators referred to in 
section 75, consider his suitability for resolving the consumer dispute involved. 
77. Duty of mediator to disclose certain facts.—It shall be the duty of the mediator to disclose— 
(a) any personal, professional or financial interest in the outcome of the consumer dispute; 
(b) the circumstances which may give rise to a justifiable doubt as to his independence or 
impartiality; and 
(c) such other facts as may be specified by regulations. 
78. Replacement of mediator in certain cases.—Where the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, is satisfied, on the information furnished by 
the mediator or on the information received from any other person including parties to the complaint and 
after hearing the mediator, it shall replace such mediator by another mediator. 
79. Procedure for mediation.—(1) The mediation shall be held in the consumer mediation cell 
attached to the District Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may 
be. 

31 
 
(2) Where a consumer dispute is referred for mediation by the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, the mediator nominated by such 
Commission shall have regard to the rights and obligations of the parties, the usages of trade, if any, the 
circumstances giving rise to the consumer dispute and such other relevant factors, as he may deem 
necessary and shall be guided by the principles of natural justice while carrying out mediation. 
(3) The mediator so nominated shall conduct mediation within such time and in such manner as may 
be specified by regulations. 
80. Settlement through mediation.—(1) Pursuant to mediation, if an agreement is reached between 
the parties with respect to all of the issues involved in the consumer dispute or with respect to only some 
of the issues, the terms of such agreement shall be reduced to writing accordingly, and signed by the 
parties to such dispute or their authorised representatives. 
(2) The mediator shall prepare a settlement report of the settlement and forward the signed agreement 
along with such report to the concerned Commission. 
(3) Where no agreement is reached between the parties within the specified time or the mediator is of 
the opinion that settlement is not possible, he shall prepare his report accordingly and submit the same to 
the concerned Commission. 
81. Recording settlement and passing of order.—(1) The District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall, within seven days of the receipt of 
the settlement report, pass suitable order recording such settlement of consumer dispute and dispose of the 
matter accordingly. 
(2) Where the consumer dispute is settled only in part, the District Commission or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record settlement of the issues which 
have been so settled and continue to hear other issues involved in such consumer dispute. 
(3) Where the consumer dispute could not be settled by mediation, the District Commission or the 
State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall continue to hear all the issues 
involved in such consumer dispute. 
CHAPTER VI 
PRODUCT LIABILITY 
82. Application of Chapter.—This Chapter shall apply to every claim for compensation under a 
product liability action by a complainant for any harm caused by a defective product manufactured by a 
product manufacturer or serviced by a product service provider or sold by a product seller. 
83. Product liability action.—A product liability action may be brought by a complainant against a 
product manufacturer or a product service provider or a product seller, as the case may be, for any harm 
caused to him on account of a defective product. 
84. Liability of product manufacturer.—(1) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product 
liability action, if— 
(a) the product contains a manufacturing defect; or 
(b) the product is defective in design; or 
(c) there is a deviation from manufacturing specifications; or 
(d) the product does not conform to the express warranty; or 
(e) the product fails to contain adequate instructions of correct usage to prevent any harm or any 
warning regarding improper or incorrect usage. 
(2) A product manufacturer shall be liable in a product liability action even if he proves that he was 
not negligent or fraudulent in making the express warranty of a product. 
 
 

32 
 
85. Liability of product service provider.—A product service provider shall be liable in a product 
liability action, if— 
(a) the service provided by him was faulty or imperfect or deficient or inadequate in quality, nature or 
manner of performance which is required to be provided by or under any law for the time being in force, 
or pursuant to any contract or otherwise; or 
(b) there was an act of omission or commission or negligence or conscious withholding any 
information which caused harm; or 
(c) the service provider did not issue adequate instructions or warnings to prevent any harm; or 
(d) the service did not conform to express warranty or the terms and conditions of the contract. 
86. Liability of product sellers.—A product seller who is not a product manufacturer shall be liable 
in a product liability action, if— 
(a) he has exercised substantial control over the designing, testing, manufacturing, packaging or 
labelling of a product that caused harm; or 
(b) he has altered or modified the product and such alteration or modification was the substantial 
factor in causing the harm; or 
(c) he has made an express warranty of a product independent of any express warranty made by a 
manufacturer and such product failed to conform to the express warranty made by the product seller 
which caused the harm; or 
(d) the product has been sold by him and the identity of product manufacturer of such product is 
not known, or if known, the service of notice or process or warrant cannot be effected on him or he is 
not subject to the law which is in force in India or the order, if any, passed or to be passed cannot be 
enforced against him; or 
(e) he failed to exercise reasonable care in assembling, inspecting or maintaining such product or 
he did not pass on the warnings or instructions of the product manufacturer regarding the dangers 
involved or proper usage of the product while selling such product and such failure was the proximate 
cause of the harm. 
87. Exceptions to product liability action.—(1) A product liability action cannot be brought against 
the product seller if, at the time of harm, the product was misused, altered, or modified. 
(2) In any product liability action based on the failure to provide adequate warnings or instructions, 
the product manufacturer shall not be liable, if— 
(a) the product was purchased by an employer for use at the workplace and the product 
manufacturer had provided warnings or instructions to such employer; 
(b) the product was sold as a component or material to be used in another product and necessary 
warnings or instructions were given by the product manufacturer to the purchaser of such component 
or material, but the harm was caused to the complainant by use of the end product in which such 
component or material was used; 
(c) the product was one which was legally meant to be used or dispensed only by or under the 
supervision of an expert or a class of experts and the product manufacturer had employed reasonable 
means to give the warnings or instructions for usage of such product to such expert or class of 
experts; or 
(d) the complainant, while using such product, was under the influence of alcohol or any 
prescription drug which had not been prescribed by a medical practitioner. 
(3) A product manufacturer shall not be liable for failure to instruct or warn about a danger which is 
obvious or commonly known to the user or consumer of such product or which, such user or consumer, 
ought to have known, taking into account the characteristics of such product. 
 
 

33 
 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
88. Penalty for non-compliance of direction of Central Authority.—Whoever, fails to comply 
with any direction of the Central Authority under sections 20 and 21, shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to twenty lakh 
rupees, or with both. 
89. Punishment for false or misleading advertisement.—Any manufacturer or service provider 
who causes a false or misleading advertisement to be made which is prejudicial to the interest of 
consumers shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine 
which may extend to ten lakh rupees; and for every subsequent offence, be punished with imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees. 
90. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or storing, selling or distributing or importing 
products containing adulterant.—(1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person on his behalf, 
manufactures for sale or stores or sells or distributes or imports any product containing an adulterant shall 
be punished, if such act— 
(a) does not result in any injury to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees; 
(b) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees; 
(c) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees; and 
(d) results in the death of a consumer, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
seven years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than 
ten lakh rupees. 
(2) The offences under clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 
(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-section (1), the court may, in case of first conviction, 
suspend any licence issued to the person referred to in that sub-section, under any law for the time being 
in force, for a period up to two years, and in case of second or subsequent conviction, cancel the licence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) "adulterant" means any material including extraneous matter which is employed or used for 
making a product unsafe; 
(b) "grievous hurt" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 320 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
91. Punishment for manufacturing for sale or for storing or selling or distributing or importing 
spurious goods.—(1) Whoever, by himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or 
stores or sells or distributes or imports any spurious goods shall be punished, if such act— 
(a) causing injury not amounting to grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year and with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees; 
(b) causing injury resulting in grievous hurt to the consumer, with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to seven years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees; 
(c) results in the death of a consumer, with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
seven years, but may extend to imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be less than ten 
lakh rupees. 
(2) The offences under clauses (b) and (c) of sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 
(3) Notwithstanding the punishment under sub-section (1), the court may, in case of first 
conviction, suspend any licence issued to the person referred to in that sub-section, under any law for 

34 
 
the time being in force, for a period up to two years, and in case of second or subsequent conviction, 
cancel the licence. 
92. Cognizance of offence by court.—No cognizance shall be taken by a competent court of any 
offence under sections 88 and 89 except on a complaint filed by the Central Authority or any officer 
authorised by it in this behalf. 
93. Vexatious search.—The Director General or any other officer, exercising powers under section 
22, who knows that there are no reasonable grounds for so doing, and yet— 
(a) searches, or causes to be searched any premises; or 
(b) seizes any record, register or other document or article, shall, for every such offence, be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to ten 
thousand rupees or with both. 
CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
94. Measures to prevent unfair trade practices in e-commerce, direct selling, etc.—For the 
purposes of preventing unfair trade practices in e-commerce, direct selling and also to protect the interest 
and rights of consumers, the Central Government may take such measures in the manner as may be 
prescribed. 
95. Presidents, members, Chief Commissioner, Commissioner and certain officers to be public 
servants.—The Presidents and members of the District Commission, the State Commission and the 
National Commission, and officers and other employees thereof, the Chief Commissioner and the 
Commissioner of the Central Authority, the Director General, the Additional Director General, the 
Director, the Joint Director, the Deputy Director and the Assistant Director and all other officers and 
employees of the Central Authority and other persons performing any duty under this Act, while acting or 
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
96. Compounding of offences.—(1) Any offence punishable under sections 88 and 89, may, either 
before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded, on payment of such amount as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that no compounding of such offence shall be made without the leave of the court before 
which a complaint has been filed under section 92: 
Provided further that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine, which 
may be imposed under this Act for the offence so compounded. 
(2) The Central Authority or any officer as may be specially authorised by him in this behalf, may 
compound offences under sub-section (1). 
(3) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to person who commits the same or similar offence, within 
a period of three years from the date on which the first offence, committed by him, was compounded. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, any second or subsequent offence committed after 
the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the offence was previously compounded, 
shall be deemed to be a first offence. 
(4) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in respect of the offence so 
compounded. 
(5) The acceptance of the sum of money for compounding an offence in accordance with sub-section 
(1) by the Central Authority or an officer of the Central Authority empowered in this behalf shall be 
deemed to amount to an acquittal within the meaning of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974). 

35 
 
97. Manner of crediting penalty.—The penalty collected under section 21 and the amount collected 
under section 96 shall be credited to such fund as may be prescribed. 
98. Protection of action taken in good faith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Presidents and members of the District Commission, the State Commission and the 
National Commission, the Chief Commissioner, the Commissioner, any officer or employee and other 
person performing any duty under this Act, for any act which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of this Act or under any rule or order made thereunder. 
99. Power to give directions by Central Government.—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Central Authority, shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its 
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government 
may give in writing to it from time to time: 
Provided that the Central Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its 
views before any direction is given under this sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final. 
100.  Act not in derogation of any other law.—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 
101. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out any of the provisions contained in this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for, — 
(a) the other class or classes of persons including public utility entities under clause (19) of 
section 2; 
(b) the contest, lottery, game of chance or skill which are to be exempted under item (b) of sub-
clause (iii) of clause (47) of section 2; 
(c) the manner of issuing bill or cash memo or receipt for goods sold or services rendered under 
sub-clause (vii) of clause (47) of section 2; 
(d) the number of other official or non-official members of the Central Council under clause (b) 
of sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(e) the time and place of meeting of Central Council and the procedure for the transaction of its 
business under sub-section (2) of section 4; 
(f) the number of Commissioners in the Central Authority under sub-section (2) of section 10; 
(g) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure of appointment, term of 
office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chief Commissioner and other Commissioners of the Central Authority under section 11; 
(h) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the Central Authority under sub-section (2) of section 13; 
(i) the qualifications for appointment of Director General, Additional Director General, Director, 
Joint Director, Deputy Director and Assistant Director and the manner of appointment under sub-
section (2) of section 15; 
(j) the manner of taking copies or extracts of document, record or article seized or produced 
before returning to the person under sub-section (3) of section 22; 
(k) the officer and the manner of disposing of articles which are subject to speedy or natural 
decay under sub-section (4) of section 22; 
(l) the form and manner for preparing annual statement of accounts by the Central Authority in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India under sub-section (1) of section 26; 

36 
 
(m) the form in which, and the time within which, an annual report, other reports and returns may 
be prepared by the Central Authority under sub-section (1) of section 27; 
(n) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of 
office, resignation and removal of President and members of the District Commission under section 
29; 
(o) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the District Commission shall have 
jurisdiction to entertain complaints under proviso to sub-section (1) of section 34; 
(p) the manner of electronically filing complaint under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 
35; 
(q) the fee, electronic form and the manner of payment of fee for filing complaint under            
sub-section (2) of section 35; 
(r) the cases which may not be referred for settlement by mediation under sub-section (1) of 
section 37; 
(s) the manner of authentication of goods sampled in case of the National Commission under 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38; 
(t) any other matter which may be prescribed under clause (f) of sub-section (9) of section 38; 
(u) the fund where the amount obtained may be credited and the manner of utilisation of such 
amount under sub-section (2) of section 39; 
(v) the form and the manner in which appeal may be preferred to the State Commission under 
section 41; 
(w) the qualifications for appointment, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, term of 
office, resignation and removal of the President and members of the State Commission under section 
43; 
(x) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the State Commission shall have 
jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 47; 
(y) the form and manner of filing appeal to the National Commission, and the manner of 
depositing fifty per cent. of the amount before filing appeal, under sub-section (1) of section 51; 
(z) the number of members of the National Commission under clause (b) of section 54; 
(za) the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal 
and other terms and conditions of service of the President and members of the National Commission 
under sub-section (1) of section 55; 
(zb) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the National Commission under sub-section (3) of section 57; 
(zc) the other value of goods and services in respect of which the National Commission shall have 
jurisdiction under the proviso to sub-clause (i) of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 58; 
(zd) the manner of depositing fifty per cent. of the amount under the second proviso to section 67; 
(ze) the form in which the National Commission and the State Commission shall furnish 
information to the Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 70; 
(zf) the persons in the consumer mediation cell under sub-section (3) of section 74; 
(zg) the measures to be taken by the Central Government to prevent unfair trade practices in        
e-commerce, direct selling under section 94; 
(zh) the amount for compounding offences under sub-section (1) of section 96; 
(zi) the fund to which the penalty and amount collected shall be credited under section 97; and 

37 
 
(zj) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provisions are to 
be, or may be, made by rules 
102.  Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Governments may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that the Central Government may, frame model rules in respect of all or any of the 
matters with respect to which the State Government may make rules under this section, and where 
any such model rules have been framed in respect of any such matter, they shall apply to the State 
until the rules in respect of that matter is made by the State Government and while making any such 
rules, so far as is practicable, they shall conform to such model rules. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the other class or classes of persons including public utility entities under clause (19) of 
section 2; 
(b) the contest, lottery, game of chance or skill which are to be exempted under item (b) of 
sub-clause (iii) of clause (47) of section 2; 
(c) the number of other official or non-official members of the State Council under             
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 6; 
(d) the time and place of meeting of the State Council and the procedure for the transaction 
of its business under sub-section (4) of section 6; 
(e) the number of other official and non-official members of District Council under clause 
(b) of sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(f) the time and place of meeting of the District Council and procedure for the transaction of 
its business under sub-section (4) of section 8; 
(g) the number of members of the District Commission under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section 28; 
(h) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
President and members of the District Commission under section 30; 
(i) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the District Commission under sub-section (3) of section 33; 
(j) the manner of authentication of goods sampled by the State Commission and the District 
Commission under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38; 
(k) the manner of depositing fifty per cent. of the amount before filing appeal under second 
proviso to section 41; 
(l) the number of members of the State Commission under sub-section (3) of section 42; 
(m) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
President and members of the State Commission under section 44; 
(n) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees of the State Commission under sub-section (3) of section 46; 
(o) the form in which the State Commission shall furnish information to the State 
Government under sub-section (5) of section 70; 
(p) the persons in the consumer mediation cell under sub-section (3) of section 74; 
(q) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed, or in respect of which provisions 
are to be, or may be, made by rules. 
103. Power of National Commission to make regulations.—(1) The National Commission may, 
with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent 

38 
 
with this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of 
giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
make provisions for— 
(a) the costs for adjournment to be imposed by the District Commission under the second 
proviso to sub-section (7) of section 38; 
(b) the costs for adjournment to be imposed by the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, under the second proviso to section 52; 
(c) the maintenance of any other information by the consumer mediation cell under           
sub-section (4) of section 74; 
(d) the manner of submission of quarterly report by consumer mediation cell to the District 
Commission, the State Commission or the National Commission under sub-section (5) of            
section 74; 
(e) the qualifications and experience required for empanelment as mediator, the procedure for 
empanelment, the manner of training empanelled mediators, the fee payable to empanelled 
mediator, the terms and conditions for empanelment, the code of conduct for empanelled mediators, 
the grounds on which, and the manner in which, empanelled mediators shall be removed or 
empanelment shall be cancelled and the other matters relating thereto under sub-section (2) of 
section 75; 
(f) the conditions for re-empanelment of mediators for another term under sub-section (3) of 
section 75; 
(g) the other facts to be disclosed by mediators under clause (c) of section 77; 
(h) the time within which, and the manner in which, mediation may be conducted under           
sub-section (3) of section 79; and 
(i) such other matter for which provision is to be, or may be, made by regulation. 
104. Power of Central Authority to make regulations.—(1) The Central Authority may, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act, for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the procedure for engaging experts and professionals and the number of such experts and 
professionals under sub-section (3) of section 13; 
(b) the procedure for transaction of business and the allocation of business of the Chief 
Commissioner and Commissioner under sub-section (1) of section 14; 
(c) the form, manner and time within which, inquiries or investigation made by the             
Director-General shall be submitted to the Central Authority under sub-section (5) of section 15; 
and 
(d) such other matter for which provision is to be, or may be, made by regulation. 
105. Rules and regulations to be laid before each House of Parliament.—(1) Every rule and every 
regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation. 

39 
 
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature. 
106. Power to Remove Difficulties.—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
107.  Repeal and savings.—(1) The Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of 
repeal. 
 

£ÉÉ®iÉ BÉEÉ ºÉÆÉÊ´ÉvÉÉxÉ 
[1
, 2024
]
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[As on 1st May, 2024] 
2024
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT, OFFICIAL LANGUAGES WING

PREFACE
This is the  sixth pocket size edition of the Constitution of 
India in the diglot form. In this edition, the text of the 
Constitution of India has been brought up-to-date by 
incorporating therein all the amendments up to the Constitution 
(One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023. The foot notes 
below the text indicate the Constitution Amendment Acts by 
which such amendments have been made. 
The Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015 
containing details of acquired and transferred territories 
between the Governments of India and Bangladesh has been 
provided in Appendix I.
The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) 
Order, 2019 and the declaration under article 370(3) of the 
Constitution have been provided respectively in Appendix II and 
Appendix III for reference.
New Delhi;
Dr. Rajiv Mani,
1st May, 2024
Secretary to the Government of India.

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED 
Art., arts. .................................................... for Article, articles.
Cl., cls.     ....................................................
   Clause, clauses.
C.O.       ....................................................
Constitution Order.
Ins.            ...................................................
Inserted.
P., pp.       ....................................................
Page, pages.
Pt.            ....................................................
Part.
Rep.          ....................................................
Repealed. 
Ss., ss.  ......................................................
Section, sections.
Sch.         ....................................................
Schedule.
Subs.       ....................................................
Substituted.
w.e.f.       ....................................................
with effect from.
w.r.e.f.       ..................................................
with retrospective effect from.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
____________                                                                    
CONTENTS
__________
                                                                                          
PREAMBLE
PART I 
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
ARTICLES 
1.
Name and territory of the Union.
  2. 
Admission or establishment of new States. 
[2A.         Sikkim to be associated with the Union.—Omitted.]
3.
Formation of new States and alteration of areas, boundaries or 
names of existing States.
4.
Laws made under articles 2 and 3 to provide for the amendment of 
the First and the Fourth Schedules and supplemental, incidental 
and consequential matters.
PART II
CITIZENSHIP
5.
Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.
6.
Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to 
India from Pakistan.
7.
Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.
8.
Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing    
outside India.
9.
Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to 
be citizens.
10.
Continuance of the rights of citizenship.
11.
Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.

Contents
ARTICLES
(ii)
PART III
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General 
12.
Definition.
13. 
Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental 
rights.
 
Right to Equality
14.
Equality before law.
15. 
Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, 
sex or place of birth.
16. 
Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment. 
17.
Abolition of Untouchability.
18. 
Abolition of titles. 
Right to Freedom
19.
Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.
20.
Protection in respect of conviction for offences.
21.
Protection of life and personal liberty.
21A.
Right to education.
22.
Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
23.
Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.
24.
Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.
Right to  Freedom of Religion
25.
Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and 
propagation of religion.
26.
Freedom to manage religious affairs.
27.
Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular 
religion.
28.
Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious 
worship in certain educational institutions.

Contents
ARTICLES
(iii)
 
Cultural and Educational Rights
29.
Protection of interests of minorities.
30.
Right of minorities to establish and administer educational 
institutions.
[31.
Compulsory acquisition of property —Omitted.]
 
Saving of Certain Laws
31A.
Saving of Laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.
31B. 
Validation of certain Acts and Regulations. 
31C.
Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles.
[31D. 
Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities.—Omitted.]
 
Right to Constitutional Remedies
 32. 
Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part.
[32A.
Constitutional validity of State laws not to be considered in 
proceedings under article 32.—Omitted.]
33.
Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part 
in their application to Forces, etc.
 34. 
Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is 
in force in any area.
35.
Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part.
PART IV
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY
36.
Definition.
37.
Application of the principles contained in this Part.
38.
State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the 
people.
39.
Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.
39A.
Equal justice and free legal aid.

Contents
ARTICLES
(iv)
40.
Organisation of village panchayats.
 41.
Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain 
cases. 
42.
Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity 
relief.
  43. 
Living wage, etc., for workers. 
43A. 
Participation of workers in management of Industries.
43B. 
Promotion of co-operative societies.
44.
Uniform civil code for the citizens.
 45.
Provision for early childhood care and education to children 
below the age of six years. 
46.
Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.
47.
Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard 
of living and to improve public health. 
48.
Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.
48A.
Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of 
forests and wild life.
49.
Protection of monuments and places and objects of national 
importance.
50.
Separation of judiciary from executive.
51.
Promotion of international peace and security.
PART IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 
51A.
Fundamental duties.
PART V
THE UNION
CHAPTER I.
THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
52. 
The President of India.
53.
Executive power of the Union.
54. 
Election of President.

Contents
ARTICLES
(v)
55.
Manner of election of President.
56.
Term of office of President.
57. 
Eligibility for re-election. 
58. 
Qualifications for election as President. 
59. 
Conditions of President’s office. 
60.
Oath or affirmation by the President.
61.
Procedure for impeachment of the President.
62. 
Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President 
and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.
63. 
The Vice-President of India.
64. 
The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of 
States. 
65. 
The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his 
functions during casual vacancies in the office, or during the 
absence, of President.
66.
Election of Vice-President.
67.
Term of office of Vice-President.
68.
Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President 
and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy. 
69.
Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President.
70.
Discharge of President’s functions in other contingencies.
71.
Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a President 
or Vice-President.
72.
Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit 
or commute sentences in certain cases.
73.
Extent of executive power of the Union.
Council of Ministers
74.
Council of Ministers  to aid and advise President.
75. 
Other provisions as to Ministers.
The Attorney-General for India
76.
Attorney-General for India.

Contents
ARTICLES
(vi)
Conduct of Government Business 
77.
Conduct of business of the Government of India.
78.
Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of 
information to the President, etc.
CHAPTER  II.
PARLIAMENT 
General 
79. 
Constitution of Parliament.
80.
Composition of the Council of States.
81.
Composition of the House of the People.
82. 
Readjustment after each census. 
83. 
Duration of Houses of Parliament. 
84. 
Qualification for membership of Parliament.
85.
Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.
86.
Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.
87.
Special address by the President.
88.
Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses.
Officers of Parliament
89.
The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.
90.
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of 
Deputy Chairman.
91.
Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the 
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
92.
The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
93.
The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.
94.
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
95.
Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the 
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.

Contents
ARTICLES
(vii)
96.
The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
97. 
Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman 
and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.
98. 
Secretariat of Parliament.
Conduct of Business
99.
Oath or affirmation by members.
100. 
Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding 
vacancies and quorum.
Disqualifications of Members
101. 
Vacation of seats.
102.
Disqualifications for membership.
103. 
Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.
104.
Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation 
under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its 
Members
105.
Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the 
members and committees thereof.
106.
Salaries and allowances of members.
Legislative Procedure
107.
Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.
108.
Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.
109.
Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.
110.
Definition of “Money Bills”.
111.
Assent to Bills.
Procedure in Financial Matters
112.
Annual financial statement.
113.
Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.
114.
Appropriation Bills.

Contents
ARTICLES
(viii)
115.
Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
116.
Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
117.
Special provisions as to financial Bills.
Procedure Generally
118.
Rules of procedure. 
119.
Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to 
financial business.
120.
Language to be used in Parliament.
121.
Restriction on discussion in Parliament.
122.
Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.
CHAPTER III.
LEGISLATIVE  POWERS OF THE 
PRESIDENT
123.
Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of  
Parliament.
CHAPTER IV.
THE UNION JUDICIARY
124.
Establishment and constitution of the Supreme Court.
124A.
National Judicial Appointments Commission.
124B.
Functions of Commission.
124C.
Power of Parliament to make law.
125.
Salaries, etc., of Judges.
126.
Appointment of acting Chief Justice.
127.
Appointment of ad hoc Judges.
128.
Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme Court.
129.
Supreme Court to be a court of record.
130.
Seat of Supreme Court.
131.
Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
[131A.
Exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to questions 
as to constitutional validity of Central laws.
Omitted.]
132.
Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from 
High Courts in certain cases.
133.
Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from 
High Courts in regard to civil matters.
134.
Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to criminal 
matters.

Contents
ARTICLES
(ix)
134A.
Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.
 135. 
Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing law 
to be exercisable by the Supreme Court.
136.
Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.
 137. 
Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court. 
138.
Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.
139.
Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain 
writs.
139A.
Transfer of certain cases.
140.
Ancillary powers of the Supreme Court.
 141. 
Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts.
142.
Enforcement of decrees and orders of the Supreme Court and 
orders as to discovery, etc. 
 143. 
Power of the President to consult the Supreme Court.
144.
Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme 
Court.
[144A.
Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to 
constitutional validity of laws.
Omitted.]
145.
Rules of Court, etc.
146.
Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court.
147.
Interpretation.
CHAPTER V.
COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-
GENERAL OF INDIA
148.
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
149.
Duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
150.
Form of accounts of the Union and of the States.
151.
Audit reports.
PART VI
THE STATES
CHAPTER I.
GENERAL
152.
Definition.

Contents
ARTICLES
(x)
CHAPTER II.
 THE EXECUTIVE
The Governor
 153. 
Governors of States.
 154. 
Executive power of State. 
 155. 
Appointment of Governor. 
156.
Term of office of Governor.
157.
Qualifications for appointment as Governor.
 158. 
Conditions of Governor’s office.
 159. 
Oath or affirmation by the Governor. 
 160. 
Discharge of the functions of the Governor in certain 
contingencies.
161.
Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit 
or commute sentences in certain cases.
162.
Extent of executive power of State.
Council of Ministers
163.
Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor.
 164. 
Other provisions as to Ministers.
The Advocate-General for the State
165.
Advocate-General for the State.
Conduct of Government Business
166.
Conduct of business of the Government of a State.
167.
Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of 
information to Governor, etc.
CHAPTER III.
THE STATE LEGISLATURE
General
168.
Constitution of Legislatures in States.
169.
Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States.
170.
Composition of the Legislative Assemblies.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xi)
171.
Composition of the Legislative Councils.
172. 
Duration of State Legislatures.
173. 
Qualification for membership of the State Legislature. 
174.
Sessions of the State Legislature, prorogation and dissolution.
175.
Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House or 
Houses.
176. 
Special address by the Governor. 
177. 
Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the 
Houses. 
 
Officers of the State Legislature
178.
The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.
179.
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of 
Speaker  and Deputy Speaker.
180.
Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the 
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.
181. 
The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
182.
The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council.
183.
Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman. 
184.
Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the 
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.
185.
The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.
186. 
Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and 
the Chairman and Deputy Chairman.
187.
Secretariat of State Legislature.
Conduct of Business
188.
Oath or affirmation by members.
189.
Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding 
vacancies and quorum.
Disqualifications of Members
190.
Vacation of seats.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xii)
191.
Disqualifications for membership.
192.
Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.
193. 
Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation 
under article 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified.
Powers, privileges and immunities of State Legislatures and 
their Members 
194.
Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the 
members and committees thereof.
195. 
Salaries and allowances of members.
Legislative Procedure
196. 
Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.
197. 
Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other 
than Money Bills.
198.
Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.
199.
Definition of “Money Bills”.
200.
Assent to Bills.
201.
Bills reserved for consideration.
Procedure in Financial Matters
202.
Annual financial statement.
203.
Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates.
204.
Appropriation Bills.
205.
Supplementary, additional or excess grants.
206.
Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.
207.
Special provisions as to financial Bills.
Procedure Generally
208.
Rules of procedure.
209.
Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in 
relation to financial business.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xiii)
210.
Language to be used in the Legislature.
211.
Restriction on discussion in the Legislature.
212.
Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.
CHAPTER IV.
LEGISLATIVE  POWER OF THE 
GOVERNOR
213.
Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of 
Legislature.
CHAPTER V.
THE  HIGH COURTS IN THE 
STATES
214.
High Courts for States.
215.
High Courts to be courts of record.
216.
Constitution of High Courts.
217.
Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High 
Court.
218.
Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to 
High Courts.
219.
Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts.
220.
Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge.
221.
Salaries, etc., of Judges.
222.
Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another.
223.
Appointment of acting Chief Justice.
224.
Appointment of additional and acting Judges.
224A.
Appointment of retired Judges at sittings of High Courts.
225.
Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.
226.
Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.
[226A.
Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in 
proceedings under article 226.
Omitted.]
227.
Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.
228.
Transfer of certain cases to High Court.
[228A.
Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to 
constitutional validity of State laws.
Omitted.]

Contents
ARTICLES
(xiv)
229. 
Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.
230.
Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union territories.
231.
Establishment of a common High Court for two or more States.
[232.
Articles 230, 231 and 232 substituted by articles 230 and 231].
CHAPTER VI.
SUBORDINATE COURTS
233.
Appointment of district judges.
233A.
Validation of appointments of, and judgments, etc., delivered by, 
certain district judges.
234. 
Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial 
service. 
235. 
Control over subordinate courts.
236. 
Interpretation.
237. 
Application of the provisions of this Chapter to certain class or 
classes of magistrates.
[PART VII.—Omitted]
THE STATES IN PART B OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[238.
Omitted.]
PART VIII
THE UNION TERRITORIES
239.
Administration of Union territories.
239A.
Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both for 
certain Union territories.
239AA.
Special provisions with respect to Delhi.
239AB.
Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery.
239B.
Power of administrator to promulgate Ordinances during recess 
of Legislature.
240.
Power of President to make regulations for certain Union 
territories.
241.
High Courts for Union territories.
[242.
Coorg.
Omitted.]
PART IX
THE PANCHAYATS
243.
Definitions.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xv)
243A.
Gram Sabha.
243B. 
Constitution of Panchayats.
243C.
Composition of Panchayats.
243D.
Reservation of seats.
243E.
Duration of Panchayats, etc.
243F.
Disqualifications for membership.
243G. 
Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
243H. 
Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats. 
243-I.
Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial 
position. 
243J.
Audit of accounts of Panchayats.
243K.
Elections to the Panchayats.
243L.
Application to Union  territories.
243M.
Part not to apply to certain areas.
243N.
Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.
243-O.
Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.
PART IXA
THE MUNICIPALITIES
243P.
Definitions.
243Q.
Constitution of Municipalities.
243R.
Composition of Municipalities.
243S.
Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.
243T.
Reservation of seats.
243U.
Duration of Municipalities, etc.
243V.
Disqualifications for membership.
243W.
Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, etc.
243X.
Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.
243Y.
Finance Commission.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xvi)
243Z.
Audit of accounts of Municipalities.
243ZA.
Elections to the Municipalities.
243ZB. 
Application to Union territories.
243ZC. 
Part not to apply to certain areas. 
243ZD.
Committee for district planning.
243ZE.
Committee for Metropolitan planning.
243ZF.
Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities.
243ZG. 
Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters. 
PART IXB 
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
243ZH.
Definitions.
243Z-I.
Incorporation of co-operative societies.
243ZJ.
Number and term of members of board and its office bearers.
243ZK.
Election of members of board.
243ZL.
Supersession and suspension of board and interim management.
243ZM.
Audit of accounts of co-operative societies.
243ZN.
Convening of general body meetings.
243Z-O.
Right of a member to get information.
243ZP.
Returns.
243ZQ.
Offences and penalties.
243ZR.
Application to multi-State co-operative societies.
243ZS.
Application to Union territories.
243ZT.
Continuance of existing laws.
PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
244.
Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas.
244A.
Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal 
areas in Assam and creation of local Legislature or Council of 
Ministers or both therefor.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xvii)
PART XI
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE 
STATES 
CHAPTER I.
LEGISLATIVE  RELATIONS
Distribution of Legislative Powers
245.
Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of 
States.
246. 
Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the 
Legislatures of States.
246A.
Special provision with respect to goods and services tax. 
247. 
Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain 
additional courts.
248.
Residuary powers of legislation.
249. 
Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the 
State List in the national interest.
250. 
Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in the 
State List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.
251.
Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 
249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States.
252.
Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by 
consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.
253.
Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.
254.
Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made 
by the Legislatures of States. 
255.
Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to 
be regarded as matters of procedure only.
CHAPTER II.
ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
General
256.
Obligation of States and the Union.
257.
Control of the Union over States in certain cases.
[257A.
Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other 
forces of the Union.
Omitted.]
258.
Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain 
cases. 

Contents
ARTICLES
(xviii)
258A.
Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.
  [259. 
Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule.
 
Omitted.]
260.
Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside India.
261. 
Public acts, records and judicial proceedings.
 
Disputes relating to Waters
262.
Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of  inter-State rivers 
or river valleys. 
Co-ordination between States 
263. 
Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council.
PART XII
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS
CHAPTER I.
FINANCE 
General
264.
Interpretation.
265. 
Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.
266.
Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the 
States.
267.
Contingency Fund.
Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States
268. 
Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by the 
States.
[268A.
Service tax levied by Union and collected by the Union and the 
States.
Omitted.]
269.
Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the 
States.
269A.
Levy and collection of goods and services tax in course of inter-
State trade or commerce.
270.
Taxes levied and  distributed between the Union and the States. 
271.
Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the Union.
[272.
Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union and may be 
distributed between the Union and the States.
Omitted.]
273. 
Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products.
274.
Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affecting 
taxation in which States are interested.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xix)
275.
Grants from the Union to certain States.
276. 
Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments. 
277.
Savings.
[278.
Agreement with States in Part B of the First Schedule with 
regard to certain financial matters.
Omitted.]
279. 
Calculation of  “net proceeds”, etc.  
279A.
Goods and Services Tax Council. 
280.
Finance Commission.
281.
Recommendations of the Finance Commission.
 
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions
282. 
Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its 
revenues.
283.
Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and 
moneys credited to the public accounts. 
284.
Custody of suitors’  deposits and other moneys received by 
public servants and courts.
285.
Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation.
286.
Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of 
goods.
287.
Exemption from taxes on electricity.
288.
Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or 
electricity in certain cases.
289.
Exemption of property and income of a State from Union 
taxation.
290.
Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions.
290A.
Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.
[291.
Privy purse sums of Rulers.
Omitted.]
CHAPTER II.
BORROWING
292.
Borrowing by the Government of India.
293.
Borrowing by States.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xx)
CHAPTER III.
PROPERTY, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES,
OBLIGATIONS AND SUITS
294.
Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations 
in certain cases.
295.
Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations 
in other cases.
296.
Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia.
 297.
Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf and 
resources of the exclusive economic zone to vest in the Union.
 298.
Power to carry on trade, etc.
 299.
Contracts.
 300.
Suits and proceedings.
CHAPTER IV.
RIGHT  TO PROPERTY
300A.
Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law.
PART XIII
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE 
WITHIN THE TERRITORY OF INDIA
301.
Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.
302.
Power of Parliament to impose restrictions on trade, commerce 
and intercourse.
303.
Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the 
States with regard to trade and commerce.
304.
Restrictions on trade, commerce and intercourse among States.
305.
Saving of existing laws and laws providing for State monopolies.
[306.
Power  of  certain  States  in  Part B  of  the  First  Schedule to 
impose  restrictions  on  trade  and  commerce.
Omitted] 
307.
Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of 
articles 301 to 304.
PART XIV
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I.
SERVICES
308.
Interpretation.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xxi)
309.
Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the 
Union or a State.
310. 
Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State.
311. 
Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in 
civil capacities under the Union or a State. 
312.
All-India services.
312A. 
Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service of 
officers of certain services.
313.
Transitional provisions.
[314.
Provision for protection of existing officers of certain services.
Omitted.]
 
CHAPTER II.—PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS 
 315. 
Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.
316.
Appointment and term of office of members.
317.
Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service 
Commission.
318.
Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of 
members and staff of the Commission.
319.
Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of 
Commission on ceasing to be such members.
320.
Functions of Public Service Commissions.
321.
Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.
322.
Expenses of Public Service Commissions.
323.
Reports of Public Service Commissions.
PART XIVA
TRIBUNALS
323A.
Administrative tribunals.
323B.
Tribunals for other matters.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xxii)
PART XV 
ELECTIONS
 324. 
Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested 
in an Election Commission.
 325. 
No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be 
included in a special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, 
caste or sex.
 326. 
Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative 
Assemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage.
327.
Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections 
to Legislatures.
328.
Power of Legislature of a State to make provision with respect to 
elections to such Legislature. 
329.
Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.
  [329A. 
Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of 
Prime Minister and Speaker.
Omitted.]
PART XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN 
CLASSES
330.
330A. 
Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in the House of the People. 
Reservation of seats for women in the House of the People. 
331.
Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the House of 
the People.
332.
332A.
Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in the Legislative Assemblies of the States. 
Reservation of seats for women in the Legislative Assemblies of 
the States. 
333.
Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States.
334.
334A.
Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after
certain period.
Reservation of seats for women take effect.
335.
Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services 
and posts.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xxiii)
336.
Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain 
services. 
337.
Special provision with respect to educational grants for the 
benefit of Anglo-Indian Community. 
 338. 
National Commission for Scheduled Castes.
338A.
National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.
338B.
National Commission for Backward Classes.
 339. 
Control of the Union over the administration of Scheduled Areas 
and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes.
340.
Appointment of  a Commission to investigate the conditions of 
backward classes.
 341. 
Scheduled Castes. 
 342. 
Scheduled Tribes.
342A.
Socially and educationally backward classes.
PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
343.
Official language of the Union.
 344. 
Commission and Committee of Parliament on official language. 
CHAPTER II.
REGIONAL LANGUAGES
345.
Official language or languages of a State.
346.
Official language for communication between one State and 
another or between a State and the Union.
347.
Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the 
population of a State.
CHAPTER III.
LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT,
HIGH COURTS, ETC.
348.
Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High 
Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.
349.
Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating to 
language.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xxiv)
CHAPTER IV.
SPECIAL DIRECTIVES
350.
Language to be used in representations for redress of grievances.
350A.
Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary stage.
350B.
Special Officer for linguistic minorities.
351.
Directive for development of the Hindi language.
PART XVIII
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
  352. 
Proclamation of Emergency.
  353. 
Effect of Proclamation of Emergency. 
 354.
Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues 
while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.
 355.
Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression 
and internal disturbance. 
356.
Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in 
States. 
357.
Exercise of legislative powers under Proclamation issued under 
article 356.
358.
Suspension  of provisions of article 19 during emergencies.
359.
Suspension of the enforcement of the rights conferred by Part III 
during emergencies.
[359A.
Application of this Part to the State of Punjab.
Omitted.]
360.
Provisions as to financial emergency.
PART XIX
MISCELLANEOUS
361.
Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs.
361A.
Protection of publication of proceedings of Parliament and State 
Legislatures.
361B.
Disqualification for appointment on remunerative political post.
[362.
Rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States.
Omitted.]
363.
Bar to interference by courts in disputes arising out of certain 
treaties, agreements, etc.
363A.
Recognition granted to Rulers of Indian States to cease and privy 
purses to be abolished.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xxv)
364.
Special provisions as to major ports and aerodromes.
365.
Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions 
given by the Union. 
366.
Definitions.
367.
Interpretation.
PART XX
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
368.
Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure 
therefor. 
PART XXI
TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL AND 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
369.
Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to 
certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the 
Concurrent List.
370.
Temporary provisions with respect to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir.
371.
Special provision with respect to the States of Maharashtra and 
Gujarat.
371A.
Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland.
371B .
Special provision with respect to the State of Assam.
371C.
Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.
371D.
Special provisions with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh or 
the State of Telangana.
371E.
Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh.
371F.
Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.
371G.
Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram.
371H.
Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
371-I.
Special provision with respect to the State of  Goa.
371J.
Special provisions with respect to the State of  Karnataka.
372.
Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.
372A.
Power of the President to adapt laws.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xxvi)
373. 
Power of President to make order in respect of persons under 
preventive detention in certain cases.
374. 
Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings 
pending in the Federal Court or before His Majesty in Council. 
375.
Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject to 
the provisions of the Constitution.
376. 
Provisions as to Judges of High Courts. 
377. 
Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
378.
Provisions as to Public Service Commissions.
378A.
Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh Legislative 
Assembly.
[379.
Provisions as to provisional Parliament and the Speaker and 
Deputy Speaker thereof.
Omitted.]
[380.
Provision as to President.
Omitted.]
[381.
Council of Ministers of the President.
Omitted.]
[382.
Provisions as to provisional Legislatures for States in Part A of 
the First Schedule.
Omitted.]
[383.
Provision as to Governors of Provinces. 
Omitted.]
[384.
Council of Ministers of the Governors.
Omitted.]
[385.
Provision as to provisional Legislatures in States in Part B of the 
First Schedule.
Omitted.]
[386. 
Council of Ministers for  States in Part B of the First Schedule. 
Omitted.]
[387.
Special provision as to determination of population for the 
purposes of certain elections.
Omitted.]
[388.
Provisions as to the filling of casual vacancies in the  provisional
Parliament 
and 
provisional 
Legislatures
of 
the
States.
Omitted.]
[389.
Provision as to Bills pending in the Dominion Legislatures and  
in the Legislatures of Provinces and Indian States.
Omitted.] 

Contents
ARTICLES
(xxvii)
[390. 
Money received or raised or expenditure incurred between the 
commencement of the Constitution and the 31st day of March, 
1950. 
Omitted.] 
[391. 
Power of the President to amend the First and Fourth Schedules 
in certain contingencies.
Omitted.]
392.
Power of the President to remove difficulties.
PART XXII
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT, 
AUTHORITATIVE TEXT
IN HINDI AND REPEALS
  393. 
Short title.
394.
Commencement.
394A.
Authoritative text in the Hindi language.
395.
Repeals.
SCHEDULES
FIRST SCHEDULE  
I. —The States.
II. —The Union territories.
SECOND SCHEDULE
PART A—Provisions as to the President and the Governors of States.
PART B— [Omitted.]
PART C—Provisions as to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of   the 
House of  the  People and the Chairman and the Deputy 
Chairman of the Council   of  States and   the  Speaker  and 
the  Deputy Speaker of  the Legislative Assembly and the 
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative  
Council of a State.   
PART D— Provisions as to the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Courts.
PART E— Provisions as to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
THIRD  SCHEDULE— Forms of Oaths or Affirmations.

Contents
ARTICLES
(xxviii)
FOURTH  SCHEDULE—Allocation of seats in the Council of States.
FIFTH SCHEDULE—
Provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled  Areas 
and Scheduled Tribes 
PART A—General.
PART B—Administration and  Control of Scheduled Areas and 
Scheduled Tribes. 
PART C— Scheduled Areas.
PART D—Amendment of the Schedule.
SIXTH SCHEDULE—
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in the States of 
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.
SEVENTH SCHEDULE—
      List I — Union List. 
      List II— State List.  
List III— Concurrent List.
EIGHTH SCHEDULE— Languages.
NINTH SCHEDULE—Validation of certain Acts and Regulations.
TENTH SCHEDULE— Provisions as to disqualification on ground of
defection.
ELEVENTH SCHEDULE—Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.
TWELFTH SCHEDULE—Powers, authority and responsibilities of 
Municipalities, etc.
APPENDICES
APPENDIX  I.—The Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.
APPENDIX  II.—The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) 
Order, 2019.
APPENDIX  III.— Declaration under article 370(3) of the Constitution.

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 
PREAMBLE
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute 
India into a 
1[SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC 
REPUBLIC] and to secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
 
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the 2[unity 
and integrity of the Nation];
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-sixth day of 
November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO 
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.2, for "SOVEREIGN 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 

2
PART I
THE UNION AND ITS TERRITORY
1. Name and territory of the Union.—(1) India, that is Bharat, 
shall be a Union of States.
1[(2) The States and the territories thereof shall be as specified in 
the First Schedule.]
(3) The territory of India shall comprise—
(a) the territories of the States; 
2[(b) the Union territories specified in the First Schedule; 
and]
(c) such other territories as may be acquired.
2. Admission or establishment of new States.—Parliament may 
by law admit into the Union, or establish, new States on such terms and 
conditions as it thinks fit.
3[2A. [Sikkim to be associated with the Union.] —Omitted by the 
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).]
3. Formation of new States and alteration of areas, 
boundaries or names of existing States.—Parliament may by law—
(a) form a new State by separation of territory from any 
State or by uniting two or more States or parts of States or by 
uniting any territory to a part of any State;
(b) increase the area of any State;
(c) diminish the area of any State;
(d) alter the boundaries of any State;
(e) alter the name of any State:
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2, for cl. (2) 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 2 ibid. for sub-clause (b) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Ins. by the Constitution  (Thirty-fifth Amendment)  Act, 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
 

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part I.—Union and its territory)
3
1[Provided that no Bill for the purpose shall be introduced in 
either House of Parliament except on the recommendation of the 
President and unless, where the proposal contained in the Bill affects 
the area, boundaries or name of any of the States12***, the Bill has 
been referred by the President to the Legislature of that State for 
expressing its views thereon within such period as may be specified in 
the reference or within such further period as the President may allow 
and the period so specified or allowed has expired.] 
3[Explanation I.—In this article, in clauses (a) to (e), “State” 
includes a Union territory, but in the proviso, “State” does not include a 
Union territory.
Explanation II.—The power conferred on Parliament by 
clause (a) includes the power to form a new State or Union territory by 
uniting a part of any State or Union territory to any other State or 
Union territory.]
4. Laws made under articles 2 and 3 to provide for the 
amendment of the First and the Fourth Schedules and 
supplemental, incidental and consequential matters.—(1) Any law 
referred to in article 2 or article 3 shall contain such provisions for the 
amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth Schedule as may be 
necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law and may also 
contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions 
(including provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the 
Legislature or Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law) 
as Parliament may deem necessary.
(2) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be an 
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.  
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 2, for the proviso 
(w.e.f. 24-12-1955).
2. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution  (Eighteenth Amendment)  Act, 1966, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27-8-1966).

4
PART II
CITIZENSHIP 
5. Citizenship at the commencement of the Constitution.—At the 
commencement of this Constitution, every person who has his domicile in the 
territory of India and—
(a) who was born in the territory of India; or 
(b) either of whose parents was born in the territory of India; or
(c) who has been ordinarily resident in the territory of India for 
not less than five years immediately preceding such commencement,  
shall be a citizen of India.
6. Rights of citizenship of certain persons who have migrated to 
India from Pakistan.—Notwithstanding anything in article 5, a person who 
has migrated to the territory of India from the territory now included in 
Pakistan shall be deemed to be a citizen of India at the commencement of this 
Constitution if—
(a) he or either of his parents or any of his grand-parents was born 
in India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally 
enacted); and
(b)(i) in the case where such person has so migrated before the 
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been ordinarily resident in the 
territory of India since the date of his migration, or
(ii) in the case where such person has so migrated on or after the 
nineteenth day of July, 1948, he has been registered as a citizen of India 
by an officer appointed in that behalf by the Government of the 
Dominion of India on an application made by him therefor to such 
officer before the commencement of this Constitution in the form and 
manner prescribed by that Government:
Provided that no person shall be so registered unless he has been resident 
in the territory of India for at least six months immediately preceding the date 
of his application.
7. Rights of citizenship of certain migrants to Pakistan.—
Notwithstanding anything in articles 5 and 6, a person who has after the first 
day of March, 1947, migrated from the territory of India to the territory now 
included in Pakistan shall not be deemed to be a citizen of India:

THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
(Part II.—Citizenship)
5
Provided that nothing in this article shall apply to a person who, after 
having so migrated to the territory now included in Pakistan, has returned to the 
territory of India under a permit for resettlement or permanent return issued by 
or under the authority of any law and every such person shall for the purposes 
of clause (b) of article 6 be deemed to have migrated to the territory of India 
after the nineteenth day of July, 1948.
8. Rights of citizenship of certain persons of Indian origin residing 
outside India.—Notwithstanding anything in article 5, any person who or 
either of whose parents or any of whose grand-parents was born in India as 
defined in the Government of India Act, 1935 (as originally enacted), and who 
is ordinarily residing in any country outside India as so defined shall be deemed 
to be a citizen of India if he has been registered as a citizen of India by the 
diplomatic or consular representative of India in the country where he is for the 
time being residing on an application made by him therefor to such diplomatic 
or consular representative, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Constitution, in the form and manner prescribed by the Government of the 
Dominion of India or the Government of India. 
9. Persons voluntarily acquiring citizenship of a foreign State not to 
be citizens.—No person shall be a citizen of India by virtue of article 5, or be 
deemed to be a citizen of India by virtue of article 6 or article 8, if he has 
voluntarily acquired the citizenship of any foreign State.
10. Continuance of the rights of citizenship.—Every person who is or 
is deemed to be a citizen of India under any of the foregoing provisions of this 
Part shall, subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament, 
continue to be such citizen.
11. Parliament to regulate the right of citizenship by law.—Nothing 
in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall derogate from the power of 
Parliament to make any provision with respect to the acquisition and 
termination of citizenship and all other matters relating to citizenship.

6
PART III 
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
General
12. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “the 
State” includes the Government and Parliament of India and the Government 
and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within 
the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India.
13. Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental 
rights.—(1) All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Part, shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
(2) The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the 
rights conferred by this Part and any law made in contravention of this clause 
shall, to the extent of the contravention, be void.
(3) In this article, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, 
notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force of 
law;
(b) “laws in force” includes laws passed or made by a Legislature 
or other competent authority in the territory of India before the 
commencement of this Constitution and not previously repealed, 
notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof may not be then in 
operation either at all or in particular areas.
1[(4) Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of this 
Constitution made under article 368.]
Right to Equality
14. Equality before law.—The State shall not deny to any person 
equality before the law or the equal protection of the laws within the territory of 
India.
15.  Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, 
sex or place of birth.—(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen 
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of 
birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or 
condition with regard to—
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution  (Twenty-fourth Amendment)  Act, 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5-11-1971). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
7
(a) access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of public 
entertainment; or 
(b) the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of 
public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or dedicated 
to the use of the general public. 
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
special provision for women and children. 
1[(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the 
State from making any special provision for the advancement of any socially 
and educationally backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes.] 
2[(5) Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 
shall prevent the State from making any special provision, by law, for the 
advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or 
for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special 
provisions relate to their admission to educational institutions including private 
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other than the 
minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30.]
3[(6) Nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 or 
clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from making,—
(a) any special provision for the advancement of any 
economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes 
mentioned in clauses (4) and (5); and 
(b)
any special provision for the advancement of any 
economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes 
mentioned in clauses (4) and (5) in so far as such special provisions 
relate to their admission to educational institutions including private 
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the State, other 
than the minority educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of 
article 30, which in the case of reservation would be in addition to the 
existing reservations and subject to a maximum of ten per cent. of the 
total seats in each category. 
______________________________________________
1. Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 2  (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-third Amendment) Act, 2005, s. 2  (w.e.f. 20-1-2006).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 2  
(w.e.f. 14-1-2019).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
8
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article and article 16, 
"economically weaker sections" shall be such as may be notified by the State 
from time to time on the basis of family income and other indicators of 
economic disadvantage.]
16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment.—(1) 
There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to 
employment or appointment to any office under the State. 
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, 
place of birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against 
in respect of, any employment or office under the State.
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law 
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an 
office 1[under the Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State 
or Union territory, any requirement as to residence within that State or Union 
territory] prior to such employment or appointment.
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any 
backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately 
represented in the services under the State.
2[(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
provision for reservation 3[in matters of promotion, with consequential 
seniority, to any class] or classes of posts in the services under the State in 
favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes which, in the opinion 
of the State, are not adequately represented in the services under the State.]
4[(4B) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from considering 
any unfilled vacancies of a year which are reserved for being filled up in that 
year in accordance with any provision for reservation made under clause (4) or 
clause (4A) as a separate class of vacancies to be filled up in any succeeding 
year or years and such class of vacancies shall not be considered together with 
the vacancies of the year in which they are being filled up for determining the 
ceiling of fifty per cent. reservation on total number of vacancies of that year.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for "under 
any State specified in the First Schedule or any local or other authority within its 
territory, any requirement as to residence within that State"  (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995, s. 2 (w.e.f. 17-6-1995).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fifth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for certain words
(retrospectively) (w.e.f. 17-6-1995).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-first Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-6-2000).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
9
(5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which 
provides that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any 
religious or denominational institution or any member of the governing body 
thereof shall be a person professing a particular religion or belonging to a 
particular denomination.
1[(6) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any 
economically weaker sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in 
clause (4), in addition to the existing reservation and subject to a maximum of 
ten per cent. of the posts in each category.]
17. Abolition of Untouchability.—“Untouchability” is abolished and its 
practice in any form is forbidden. The enforcement of any disability arising out 
of “Untouchability” shall be an offence punishable in accordance with law.
18. Abolition of titles.—(1) No title, not being a military or academic 
distinction, shall be conferred by the State.
(2) No citizen of India shall accept any title from any foreign State.
(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while he holds any 
office of profit or trust under the State, accept without the consent of the 
President any title from any foreign State.
(4) No person holding any office of profit or trust under the State shall, 
without the consent of the President, accept any present, emolument, or office 
of any kind from or under any foreign State.
Right to Freedom
19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc.—
(1) All citizens shall have the right—
(a) to freedom of speech and expression;
(b) to assemble peaceably and without arms;
(c) to form associations or unions 2[or co-operative societies];
(d) to move freely throughout the territory of India;
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Third Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 3
(w.e.f. 14-1-2019).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-2-2012).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
10
(e) to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India; 1[and]
2[(f)*                      *                      *                    *                     *] 
(g) to practise any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or 
business. 
3[(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) shall affect the operation of 
any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such 
law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the 
said sub-clause in the interests of 4[the sovereignty and integrity of India], the 
security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, 
decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or 
incitement to an offence.]
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (b) of the said clause shall affect the operation 
of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making 
any law imposing, in the interests of 4[the sovereignty and integrity of India or]
public order, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by 
the said sub-clause.
(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect the operation 
of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making 
any law imposing, in the interests of 4[the sovereignty and integrity of India or]
public order or morality, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right 
conferred by the said sub-clause.
(5) Nothing in 5[sub-clauses (d) and (e)] of the said clause shall affect 
the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State 
from making any law imposing, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of any 
of the rights conferred by the said sub-clauses either in the interests of the 
general public or for the protection of the interests of any Scheduled Tribe.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Sub-clause (f) omitted by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for cl.
(2)
(with retrospective 
effect).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 2,  for "sub-clauses 
(d), (e) and (f)" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).  

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
11
(6) Nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation 
of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent the State from making 
any law imposing, in the interests of the general public, reasonable restrictions 
on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, and, in particular, 
1[nothing in the said sub-clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in 
so far as it relates to, or prevent the State from making any law relating to,—
(i) the professional or technical qualifications necessary for practising 
any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or business; or
(ii) the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or 
controlled by the State, of any trade, business, industry or service, 
whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or otherwise.]
20. Protection in respect of conviction for offences.—(1) No person 
shall be convicted of any offence except for violation of a law in force at the 
time of the commission of the Act charged as an offence, nor be subjected to a 
penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in force 
at the time of the commission of the offence.
(2) No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence 
more than once.
(3) No person accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness 
against himself.
21. Protection of life and personal liberty.—No person shall be 
deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure 
established by law.
2[21A. Right to education.—The State shall provide free and 
compulsory education to all children of the age of six to fourteen years in such 
manner as the State may,  by law,  determine.]
22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.—(1) No 
person who is arrested shall be detained in custody without being informed, as 
soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right 
to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice.
______________________________________________
1.  Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 3, for certain words 
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2 Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-4-2010).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
12
(2) Every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be 
produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of 
such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest 
to the court of the magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody 
beyond the said period without the authority of a magistrate.
(3) Nothing in clauses (1) and (2) shall apply—
(a) to any person who for the time being is an enemy alien; or
(b) to any person who is arrested or detained under any law providing 
for preventive detention.
(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the 
detention of a person for a longer period than three months unless—
(a) an Advisory Board consisting of persons who are, or have been, 
or are qualified to be appointed as, Judges of a High Court has reported 
before the expiration of the said period of three months that there is in its 
opinion sufficient cause for such detention:
______________________________________________
Cl. (4) shall stand substituted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth  Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 3 (date 
yet to be notified) as—
"(4) No law providing for preventive detention shall authorise the detention of a person for 
a longer period than two months unless an Advisory Board constituted in accordance with the 
recommendations of the Chief Justice of the appropriate High Court has reported before the 
expiration of the said period of two months that there is in its opinion sufficient cause for such 
detention:
Provided that an Advisory Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two other 
members, and the Chairman shall be a serving Judge of the appropriate High Court and the other 
members shall be serving or retired Judges of any High Court :
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall authorise the detention of any person 
beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made by Parliament under sub-clause (a) of 
clause (7).
Explanation.—In this clause, "appropriate High Court" means,—
(i) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention 
made by the Government of India or an officer or authority subordinate to that 
Government, the High Court for the Union territory of Dehli;
(ii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention 
made by the Government of any State (other than a Union territory), the High Court for 
that State; and
(iii) in the case of the detention of a person in pursuance of an order of detention 
made by the administrator of a Union territory or an officer or authority subordinate to such 
administrator, such High Court as may be specified by or under any law made by 
Parliament in this behalf.".

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
13
Provided that nothing in this sub-clause shall authorise the detention 
of any person beyond the maximum period prescribed by any law made 
by Parliament under sub-clause (b) of clause (7); or
(b) such person is detained in accordance with the provisions of any 
law made by Parliament under sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (7).
(5) When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made under 
any law providing for preventive detention, the authority making the order 
shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such person the grounds on which the 
order has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a 
representation against the order.
(6) Nothing in clause (5) shall require the authority making any such 
order as is referred to in that clause to disclose facts which such authority 
considers to be against the public interest to disclose.
(7) Parliament may by law prescribe—
(a) the circumstances under which, and the class or classes of cases 
in which, a person may be detained for a period longer than three months 
under any law providing for preventive detention without obtaining the 
opinion of an Advisory Board in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-clause (a) of clause (4);
(b) the maximum period for which any person may in any class or 
classes of cases be detained under any law providing for preventive 
detention; and
(c) the procedure to be followed by an Advisory Board in an 
inquiry under 
sub-clause (a) of clause (4).
______________________________________________
Sub-clause (a) shall stand omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth  Amendment) Act, 
1978, s. 3(b)(i) (date to be notified).
 Sub-clause (b) shall stand re-lettered as sub-clause (a) by s. 3(b)(ii), ibid. (date to be 
notified).
Sub-clause (c) shall stand re-lettered as sub-clause (b) by s. 3(b)(iii), ibid. (date to be 
notified).
Sub-clause (a) of clause (4) shall stand substituted as "clause (4)" by s. 3(b)(iii), 
ibid. (date to be notified).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
14
Right against Exploitation
23. Prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour.—(1) 
Traffic in human beings and begar and other similar forms of forced labour are 
prohibited and any contravention of this provision shall be an offence 
punishable in accordance with law.
(2) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from imposing 
compulsory service for public purposes, and in imposing such service the State 
shall not make any discrimination on grounds only of religion, race, caste or 
class or any of them. 
24. Prohibition of employment of children in factories, etc.—No child 
below the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or 
mine or engaged in any other hazardous employment.
Right to Freedom of Religion
25. Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and 
propagation of religion.—(1) Subject to public order, morality and health and 
to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom 
of conscience and the right freely to profess, practice and propagate religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing law or 
prevent the State from making any law—
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or 
other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open 
of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and 
sections of Hindus.
Explanation I.—The wearing and carrying of kirpans shall be deemed to 
be included in the profession of the Sikh religion.
Explanation II.—In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the reference to Hindus 
shall be construed as including a reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina 
or Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious institutions shall be 
construed accordingly.
26. Freedom to manage religious affairs.—Subject to public order, 
morality and health, every religious denomination or any section thereof shall 
have the right—
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable 
purposes;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
15
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable property; and
(d) to administer such property in accordance with law.
27. Freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular 
religion.—No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes, the proceeds of 
which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the promotion 
or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination.
28. Freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious 
worship in certain educational institutions.—(1) No religious instruction 
shall be provided in any educational institution wholly maintained out of State 
funds.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to an educational institution which 
is administered by the State but has been established under any endowment or 
trust which requires that religious instruction shall be imparted in such 
institution.
(3) No person attending any educational institution recognised by the 
State or receiving aid out of State funds shall be required to take part in any 
religious instruction that may be imparted in such institution or to attend any 
religious worship that may be conducted in such institution or in any premises 
attached thereto unless such person or, if such person is a minor, his guardian 
has given his consent thereto.
Cultural and Educational Rights
29. Protection of interests of minorities.—(1) Any section of the 
citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct 
language, script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same.
(2) No citizen shall be denied admission into any educational institution 
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of 
religion, race, caste, language or any of them.
30. Right of minorities to establish and administer educational 
institutions.—(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language, shall 
have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their 
choice.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
16
1[(1A) In making any law providing for the compulsory acquisition of 
any property of an educational institution established and administered by a 
minority, referred to in clause (1), the State shall ensure that the amount fixed 
by or determined under such law for the acquisition of such property is such as 
would not restrict or abrogate the right guaranteed under that clause.]
(2) The State shall not, in granting aid to educational institutions, 
discriminate against any educational institution on the ground that it is under 
the management of a minority, whether based on religion or language.
2*    
*              
*                    
*
31. [Compulsory acquisition of property.].—Omitted by the Constitution 
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 6 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3[Saving of Certain Laws]
4[31A. Saving of laws providing for acquisition of estates, etc.—
5[(1)  Notwithstanding  anything contained in article 13, no law providing 
for—
(a) the acquisition by the State of any estate or of any rights therein 
or the extinguishment or modification of any such rights; or
(b) the taking over of the management of any property by the State 
for a limited period either in the public interest or in order to secure the 
proper management of the property; or
(c)  the amalgamation of two or more corporations either in the public 
interest or in order to secure the proper management of any of the 
corporations; or 
(d) the extinguishment or modification of any rights of managing 
agents, secretaries and treasurers, managing directors, directors or 
managers of corporations, or of any voting rights of shareholders 
thereof; or
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth  Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).  
2. Sub-heading "Right to Property" omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).  
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second  Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).  
4. Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 4, (with retrospective effect).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3, for cl. (1) (with 
retrospective effect).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
17
(e) the extinguishment or modification of any rights accruing by 
virtue of any agreement, lease or licence for the purpose of searching for, 
or winning, any mineral or mineral oil, or the premature termination or 
cancellation of any such agreement, lease or licence,
shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or takes 
away or abridges any of the rights conferred by 1[article 14 or article 19]:
Provided that where such law is a law made by the Legislature of a State, 
the provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having 
been reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent:]
2[Provided further that where any law makes any provision for the 
acquisition by the State of any estate and where any land comprised therein is 
held by a person under his personal cultivation, it shall not be lawful for the 
State to acquire any portion of such land as is within the ceiling limit applicable 
to him under any law for the time being in force or any building or structure 
standing thereon or appurtenant thereto, unless the law relating to the 
acquisition of such land, building or structure, provides for payment of 
compensation at a rate which shall not be less than the market value thereof.]
(2) In this article,—
3[(a) the expression “estate” shall, in relation to any local area, have 
the same meaning as that expression or its local equivalent has in the 
existing law relating to land tenures in force in that area and shall also 
include—
(i) any jagir, inam or muafi or other similar grant and in the States 
of 4[Tamil Nadu] and Kerala, any janmam right;
(ii) any land held under ryotwari settlement;
(iii) any land held or let for purposes of agriculture or for 
purposes ancillary thereto, including waste land, forest land, land for 
pasture or sites of buildings and other structures occupied by 
cultivators of land, agricultural labourers and village artisans;]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth  Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 7, for "article 14, 
article 19 or article 31" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).  
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventeenth  Amendment) Act, 1964, s. 2(i) (w.e.f. 20-6-1964).
3. Subs. by s.2(ii), ibid., for sub-clause (a) (with retrospective effect). 
4. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 4, for 
"Madras" (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
18
(b) the expression “rights”, in relation to an estate, shall include any 
rights vesting in a proprietor, sub-proprietor, under-proprietor, tenure-
holder, 1[raiyat, under-raiyat] or other intermediary and any rights or 
privileges in respect of land revenue.] 
2[31B. Validation of certain Acts and Regulations.—Without 
prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in article 31A, none of 
the Acts and Regulations specified in the Ninth Schedule nor any of the 
provisions thereof shall be deemed to be void, or ever to have become void, on 
the ground that such Act, Regulation or provision is inconsistent with, or takes 
away or abridges any of the rights conferred by, any provisions of this Part, and 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court or Tribunal to the 
contrary, each of the said Acts and Regulations shall, subject to the power of 
any competent Legislature to repeal or amend it, continue in force.]
3[31C. Saving of laws giving effect to certain directive principles.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in article 13, no law giving effect to the 
policy of the State towards securing 4[all or any of the principles laid down in 
Part IV] shall be deemed to be void on the ground that it is inconsistent with, or 
takes away or abridges any of the rights conferred by 5[article 14 or article 19;] 
6[and no law containing a declaration that it is for giving effect to such policy 
shall be called in question in any court on the ground that it does not give effect 
to such policy]:
Provided that where such law is made by the Legislature of a State, the 
provisions of this article shall not apply thereto unless such law, having been 
reserved for the consideration of the President, has received his assent.]
 731D. [Saving of laws in respect of anti-national activities.].—Omitted
by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act,1977, s. 2 (w.e.f.13-4-1978).
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourth  Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 3 (with retrospective effect).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 5 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20-4-1972).
4. Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-second  Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 4, for “the principles 
specified in clause (b) or clause (c) of article 39” (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). Section 4 has been 
declared invalid by  the Supreme Court in Minerva Mills Ltd. and Others Vs Union of India 
and Others, AIR 1980 SC 1789. 
5. Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-fourth  Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 8, for “article 14, article 
19 or article 31” (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
6. The words in italics struck down by the Supreme Court in Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of 
Kerala, AIR 1973, SC 1461.
7. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 5 (w.e.f. 03-01-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
19
Right  to Constitutional Remedies 
32. Remedies for enforcement of rights conferred by this Part.—(1) 
The right to move the Supreme Court by appropriate proceedings for the 
enforcement of the rights conferred by this Part is guaranteed.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have power to issue directions or orders or 
writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition,
quo warranto and certiorari,
whichever may be appropriate, for the 
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part.
(3) Without prejudice to the powers conferred on the Supreme Court by 
clauses (1) and (2), Parliament may by law empower any other court to exercise 
within the local limits of its jurisdiction all or any of the powers exercisable by 
the Supreme Court under clause (2).
(4) The right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except as 
otherwise provided for by this Constitution.
132A. [Constitutional validity of State laws not to be considered in 
proceedings under article 32.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third 
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 3 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
2[33. Power of Parliament to modify the rights conferred by this Part 
in their application to Forces, etc.—Parliament may, by law, determine to what 
extent any of the rights conferred by this Part shall, in their application to,—
(a)  the members of the Armed Forces; or
(b) the members of the Forces charged with the maintenance of 
public order; or
(c) persons employed in any bureau or other organisation established 
by the State for purposes of intelligence or counter intelligence; or
(d) person employed in, or in connection with, the telecommunication 
systems set up for the purposes of any Force, bureau or organisation 
referred to in clauses (a) to (c),
be restricted or abrogated so as to ensure the proper discharge of their duties 
and the maintenance of discipline among them.]
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-second  Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fiftieth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for art. 33 
(w.e.f. 11-9-1984).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part III.—Fundamental Rights)
20
34. Restriction on rights conferred by this Part while martial law is 
in force in any area.—Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions 
of this Part, Parliament may by law indemnify any person in the service of the 
Union or of a State or any other person in respect of any act done by him in 
connection with the maintenance or restoration of order in any area within the 
territory of India where martial law was in force or validate any sentence 
passed, punishment inflicted, forfeiture ordered or other act done under martial 
law in such area. 
35. Legislation to give effect to the provisions of this Part.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—  
(a) Parliament shall have, and the Legislature of a State shall not 
have, power to make laws—
(i) with respect to any of the matters which under clause (3) of 
article 16, clause (3) of article 32, article 33 and article 34 may be 
provided for by law made by Parliament; and 
(ii) for prescribing punishment for those acts which are declared 
to be offences under this Part,
and Parliament shall, as soon as may be after the commencement of this 
Constitution, make laws for prescribing punishment for the acts referred 
to in sub-clause (ii);
(b) any law in force immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution in the territory of India with respect to any of the matters 
referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause (a) or providing for punishment for 
any act referred to in sub-clause (ii) of that clause shall, subject to the 
terms thereof and to any adaptations and modifications that may be made 
therein under article 372, continue in force until altered or repealed or 
amended by Parliament.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression "law in force'' has the same 
meaning as in article 372. 

21
PART IV
DIRECTIVE PRINCIPLES OF STATE POLICY 
36. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, “the 
State” has the same meaning as in Part III. 
37. Application of the principles contained in this Part.—The 
provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable by any court, but the 
principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of 
the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in 
making laws. 
38. State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the 
people.—1[(1)] The State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by 
securing and protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, 
social, economic and political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life. 
2[(2) The State shall, in particular, strive to minimise the inequalities in 
income, and endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and 
opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of people 
residing in different areas or engaged in different vocations.]
39. Certain principles of policy to be followed by the State.—The 
State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing—
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an 
adequate means of livelihood;
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources of the 
community are so distributed as best to subserve the common good;
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not result in the 
concentration of wealth and means of production to the common 
detriment;
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women;
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and women, and 
the tender age of children are not abused and that citizens are not forced 
by economic necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age or 
strength;
______________________________________________
1. Art. 38 renumbered as cl. (1) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 
1978, s. 9 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IV.— Directive Principles of State Policy)
22
1[(f) that children are given opportunities and facilities to develop 
in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity and that 
childhood and youth are protected against exploitation and against moral 
and material abandonment.]
2[39A. Equal justice and free legal aid.—The State shall secure that the 
operation of the legal system promotes justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, 
and shall, in particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes 
or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not 
denied to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities.] 
40. Organisation of village panchayats.—The State shall take steps to 
organise village panchayats and endow them with such powers and authority as 
may be necessary to enable them to function as units of self-government.
41. Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain 
cases.—The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and 
development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to 
education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness 
and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want.
42. Provision for just and humane conditions of work and maternity 
relief.—The State shall make provision for securing just and humane 
conditions of work and for maternity relief.
43. Living wage, etc., for workers.—The State shall endeavour to 
secure, by suitable legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to 
all workers, agricultural, industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, 
conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full enjoyment of 
leisure and social and cultural opportunities and, in particular, the State shall 
endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual or co-operative basis 
in rural areas.
3[43A. Participation of workers in management of industries.—The 
State shall take steps, by suitable legislation or in any other way, to secure the 
participation of workers in the management of undertakings, establishments or 
other organisations engaged in any industry.] 
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 7, for cl. (f)
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IV.— Directive Principles of State Policy)
23
1[43B. Promotion of co-operative societies.—The State shall endeavour 
to promote voluntary formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control 
and professional management of co-operative societies.]
44. Uniform civil code for the citizens.—The State shall endeavour to 
secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India.
2[45. Provision for early childhood care and education to children 
below the age of six years.—The State shall endeavour to provide early 
childhood care and education for all children until they complete the age of six 
years.] 
46. Promotion of educational and economic interests of Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and other weaker sections.—The State shall 
promote with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker 
sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of 
exploitation. 
47. Duty of the State to raise the level of nutrition and the standard 
of living and to improve public health.—The State shall regard the raising of 
the level of nutrition and the standard of living of its people and the 
improvement of public health as among its primary duties and, in particular, the 
State shall endeavour to bring about prohibition of the consumption except for 
medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of drugs which are injurious to 
health. 
48. Organisation of agriculture and animal husbandry.—The State 
shall endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and 
scientific lines and shall, in particular, take steps for preserving and improving 
the breeds, and prohibiting the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch 
and draught cattle.
3[48A. 
Protection 
and 
improvement 
of 
environment 
and 
safeguarding of forests and wild life.—The State shall endeavour to protect 
and improve the environment and to safeguard the forests and wild life of the 
country.]
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15-2-2012). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-sixth Amendment) Act, 2002, s. 3, for art. 45   
(w.e.f. 1-4-2010).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 10 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IV.— Directive Principles of State Policy)
24
49. Protection of monuments and places and objects of national 
importance.—It shall be the obligation of the State to protect every monument 
or place or object of artistic or historic interest, 1[declared by or under law 
made by Parliament] to be of national importance, from spoliation, 
disfigurement, destruction, removal, disposal or export, as the case may be.
50. Separation of judiciary from executive.—The State shall take steps 
to separate the judiciary from the executive in the public services of the State.
51. Promotion of international peace and security.—The State shall 
endeavour to—
(a)  promote international peace and security; 
(b)  maintain just and honourable relations between nations;
(c) foster respect for international law and treaty obligations in the 
dealings of organised peoples with one another; and
(d) encourage settlement of international disputes by arbitration.  
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for "declared by 
Parliament by law" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

25
1[PART  IVA
FUNDAMENTAL DUTIES 
51A. Fundamental duties.—It shall be the duty of every citizen of 
India—
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and 
institutions, the National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our 
national struggle for freedom; 
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of 
India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called 
upon to do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood 
amongst all the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and 
regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the 
dignity of women;
(f) to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite 
culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including 
forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living 
creatures; 
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of 
inquiry and reform;
(i) to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j) to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and 
collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of 
endeavour and achievement; ]
2[(k) who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for 
education to his child or, as  the case may be, ward between the age of 
six and fourteen years.]
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 11 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by the Constitution  (Eighty-sixth Amendment)  Act, 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-2010).

26
PART  V
THE UNION
CHAPTER I.—THE EXECUTIVE
The President and Vice-President
52. The President of India.—There shall be a President of India.
53. Executive power of the Union.—(1) The executive power of the Union 
shall be vested in the President and shall be exercised by him either directly or 
through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the 
supreme command of the Defence Forces of the Union shall be vested in the 
President and the exercise thereof shall be regulated by law.
(3) Nothing in this article shall— 
(a) be deemed to transfer to the President any functions conferred 
by any existing law on the Government of any State or other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament from conferring by law functions on 
authorities other than the President. 
54. Election of President.—The President shall be elected by the 
members of an electoral college consisting of—
(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and
(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of the States.
1[Explanation.—In this article and in article 55, “State” includes the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Union territory of  *Puducherry.]
55. Manner of election of President.—(1) As far as practicable, there 
shall be uniformity in the scale of representation of the different States at the 
election of the President.
(2) For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States inter se 
as well as parity between the States as a whole and the Union, the number of 
votes which each elected member of Parliament and of the Legislative 
Assembly of each State is entitled to cast at such election shall be determined in 
the following manner:—
(a) every elected member of the Legislative Assembly of a State shall 
have as many votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient 
obtained by dividing the population of the State by the total number of 
the elected members of the Assembly;
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-1995).
* Now Puducherry vide the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006),
s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
27
(b) if, after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is 
not less than five hundred, then the vote of each member referred to in 
sub-clause (a) shall be further increased by one;
(c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have 
such number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total number of 
votes assigned to the members of the Legislative Assemblies of the 
States under sub-clauses (a) and (b)  by the total number of the elected 
members of both Houses of Parliament, fractions exceeding one-half 
being counted as one and other fractions being disregarded.
(3) The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the 
system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote 
and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.
1[Explanation.—In this article, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant 
figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding 
census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the 
relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2[2026] have been 
published, be construed as a reference to the 1971 census.]
56. Term of office of President.—(1) The President shall hold office for 
a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that—
(a) the President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Vice-President, resign his office;
(b) the President may, for violation of the Constitution, be removed 
from office by impeachment in the manner provided in article 61;
(c) the President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, 
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
(2) Any resignation addressed to the Vice-President under clause (a) of 
the proviso to clause (1) shall forthwith be communicated by him to the 
Speaker of the House of the People.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 12, for the 
Explanation (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 2, for "2000"
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
28
57. Eligibility for re-election.—A person who holds, or who has held, 
office as President shall, subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, be 
eligible for re-election to that office.
58. Qualifications for election as President.—(1) No person shall be 
eligible for election as President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India,
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years, and 
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People. 
(2) A person shall not be eligible for election as President if he holds 
any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any 
State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the 
said Governments.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be 
deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or 
Vice-President of the Union or the Governor 1*** of any State or is a Minister 
either for the Union or for any State.
59. Conditions of President's office.—(1) The President shall not be a 
member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any 
State, and if a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the 
Legislature of any State be elected President, he shall be deemed to have 
vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon his office as 
President.
(2) The President shall not hold any other office of profit.
(3) The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of 
his official residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments, 
allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and, 
until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and 
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
(4) The emoluments and allowances of the President shall not be 
diminished during his term of office.
60. Oath or affirmation by the President.—Every President and every 
person acting as President or discharging the functions of the President shall, 
before entering upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief 
Justice of India or, in his absence, the senior-most Judge of the Supreme Court 
available, an oath or affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
29
"I,  A.B., do swear in the name of God that I will  faithfully  execute the office    
                       solemnly affirm 
of President (or discharge the functions of the President) of India and will to the best 
of my ability preserve,  protect  and  defend  the Constitution  and  the  law  and  that  
I  will  devote  myself  to  the  service  and  well-being of  the  people  of  India.".
61. Procedure for impeachment of the President.—(1) When a 
President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall 
be preferred by either House of Parliament.
(2) No such charge shall be preferred unless—
(a) the proposal to prefer such charge is contained in a resolution 
which has been moved after at least fourteen days' notice in writing 
signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the 
House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and
(b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than 
two-thirds of the total membership of the House.
(3) When a charge has been so preferred by either House of Parliament, 
the other House shall investigate the charge or cause the charge to be 
investigated and the President shall have the right to appear and to be 
represented at such investigation.
(4) If as a result of the investigation a resolution is passed by a majority 
of not less than two-thirds of the total membership of the House by which the 
charge was investigated or caused to be investigated, declaring that the charge 
preferred against the President has been sustained, such resolution shall have 
the effect of removing the President from his office as from the date on which 
the resolution is so passed.
62. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of President 
and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.—(1) An 
election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office of 
President shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
 (2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of President occurring by 
reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be held as soon 
as possible after,  and in no case later than six months from, the date of 
occurrence of the vacancy; and the person elected to fill the vacancy shall, 
subject to the provisions of article 56, be entitled to hold office for the full term 
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.
63. The Vice-President of India.—There shall be a Vice-President of India.
64. The Vice-President to be ex officio Chairman of the Council of 
States.—The Vice-President shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of the
States and shall not hold any other office of profit:

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
30
Provided that during any period when the Vice-President acts as 
President or discharges the functions of the President under article 65, he shall 
not perform the duties of the office of Chairman of the Council of States and 
shall not be entitled to any salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of the 
Council of States under article 97.
 65. The Vice-President  to act  as  President  or to discharge  his  
functions during  casual  vacancies  in  the  office, or during  the  absence,  
of  President.—(1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office 
of the President by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise, 
the Vice-President shall act as President until the date on which a new 
President elected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter to fill such 
vacancy enters upon his office.
(2) When the President is unable to discharge his functions owing to 
absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-President shall discharge his 
functions until the date on which the President resumes his duties.
(3) The Vice-President shall, during, and in respect of, the period while 
he is so acting as, or discharging the functions of, President, have all the 
powers and immunities of the President and be entitled to such emoluments, 
allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and, 
until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and 
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
66. Election of Vice-President.—(1) The Vice-President shall be 
elected by the 1[members of an electoral college consisting of the members of 
both Houses of Parliament] in accordance with the system of proportional 
representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting at such 
election shall be by secret ballot.
(2) The Vice-President shall not be a member of either House of 
Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State, and if a member of 
either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any State be 
elected Vice-President, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that 
House on the date on which he enters upon his office as Vice-President.
(3) No person shall be eligible for election as Vice-President unless he—
(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) has completed the age of thirty-five years; and
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eleventh Amendment) Act, 1961, s. 2, for "members of both 
Houses of Parliament assembled at a joint meeting" (w.e.f. 19-12-1961).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
31
(c) is qualified for election as a member of the Council of States.
(4) A person shall not be eligible for election as Vice-President if he 
holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of 
any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of 
the said Governments.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, a person shall not be 
deemed to hold any office of profit by reason only that he is the President or 
Vice-President of the Union or the Governor 1*** of any State or is a Minister 
either for the Union or for any State.
67. Term of office of Vice-President.—The Vice-President shall hold 
office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office:
Provided that— 
(a) a Vice-President may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
President, resign his office; 
(b) a Vice-President may be removed from his office by a resolution 
of the Council of States passed by a majority of all the then members of 
the Council and agreed to by the House of the People; but no resolution 
for the purpose of this clause shall be moved unless at least fourteen 
days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution;
(c) a Vice-President shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, 
continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
68. Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-
President and the term of office of person elected to fill casual vacancy.—
(1) An election to fill a vacancy caused by the expiration of the term of office 
of Vice-President shall be completed before the expiration of the term.
(2) An election to fill a vacancy in the office of Vice-President 
occurring by reason of his death, resignation or removal, or otherwise shall be 
held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy, and the person 
elected to fill the vacancy shall, subject to the provisions of article 67, be 
entitled to hold office for the full term of five years from the date on which he 
enters upon his office.
69. Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President.—Every Vice-
President shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe before the 
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh or Uparajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
32
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or 
affirmation in the following form, that is to say—
   "I, A.B., do swear in the name of God that  I  will  bear   true  faith  and                   
                           solemnly affirm                                                     
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully 
discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.". 
70. Discharge of President's functions in other contingencies.—
Parliament may make such provision as it thinks fit for the discharge of the 
functions of the President in any contingency not provided for in this Chapter.
1[71. Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of a 
President or Vice-President.—(1) All doubts and disputes arising out of or in 
connection with the election of a President or Vice-President shall be inquired 
into and decided by the Supreme Court whose decision shall be final.
(2) If the election of a person as President or Vice-President is declared 
void by the Supreme Court, acts done by him in the exercise and performance 
of the powers and duties of the office of President or Vice-President, as the 
case may be, on or before the date of the decision of the Supreme Court shall 
not be invalidated by reason of that declaration.
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may by law 
regulate any matter relating to or connected with the election of a President or 
Vice-President.
(4) The election of a person as President or Vice-President shall not be 
called in question on the ground of the existence of any vacancy for whatever 
reason among the members of the electoral college electing him.]
72. Power of President to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit 
or commute sentences in certain cases.—(1) The President shall have the 
power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or to 
suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any 
offence—
(a) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is by a Court 
Martial;
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f 10-8-1975) and 
further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 10.
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
33
(b) in all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an offence 
against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the 
Union extends; 
(c) in all cases where the sentence is a sentence of death.
(2) Nothing in sub-clause (a)
of clause (1) shall affect the power 
conferred by law on any officer of the Armed Forces of the Union to suspend, 
remit or commute a sentence passed by a Court Martial. 
(3) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of clause (1) shall affect the power to 
suspend, remit or commute a sentence of death exercisable by the Governor
1***
of a State under any law for the time being in force. 
73. Extent of executive power of the Union.—(1) Subject to the 
provisions of this Constitution, the executive power of the Union shall extend—
(a) to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make 
laws; and 
(b) to the exercise of such rights, authority and jurisdiction as are  
exercisable by the Government of India by virtue of any treaty or 
agreement:
Provided that the executive power referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not, 
save as expressly provided in this Constitution or in any law made by Parliament, 
extend in any State 2*** to matters with respect to which the Legislature of the 
State has also power to make laws.
(2) Until otherwise provided by Parliament, a State and any officer or 
authority of a State may, notwithstanding anything in this article, continue to 
exercise in matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws for 
that State such executive power or functions as the State or officer or authority 
thereof could exercise immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution.
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
34
Council of Ministers
74. Council of Ministers to aid and advise President.—1[(1) There shall 
be a Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise 
the President who shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in accordance with 
such advice:]
2[Provided that the President may require the Council of Ministers to 
reconsider such advice, either generally or otherwise, and the President shall act 
in accordance with the advice tendered after such reconsideration.]
(2) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by 
Ministers to the President shall not be inquired into in any court. 
75. Other provisions as to Ministers.—(1) The Prime Minister shall be 
appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the 
President on the advice of the Prime Minister.
3[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the 
Council of Ministers shall not exceed fifteen per cent.  of the total number of 
members of the House of the People.  
(1B) A member of either House of Parliament belonging to any political 
party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 of 
the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister under 
clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his 
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member 
would expire or where he contests any election to either House of Parliament 
before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is declared elected, 
whichever is earlier.]
(2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the President.
(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the House 
of the People.
(4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the President shall administer 
to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the 
purpose in the Third Schedule.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.13, for cl. (1)
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 11 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
35
(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a 
member of either House of Parliament shall at the expiration of that period cease 
to be a Minister. 
 (6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as Parliament 
may from time to time by law determine and, until Parliament so determines, 
shall be as specified in the Second Schedule.
The Attorney-General for India
76. Attorney-General for India.—(1) The President shall appoint a 
person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of the Supreme Court to be 
Attorney-General for India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Attorney-General to give advice to the 
Government of India upon such legal matters, and to perform such other duties 
of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to him by 
the President, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or under this 
Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) In the performance of his duties the Attorney-General shall have 
right of audience in all courts in the territory of India.
(4) The Attorney-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
President, and shall receive such remuneration as the President may determine.
Conduct of Government Business
77. Conduct of business of the Government of India.—(1) All 
executive action of the Government of India shall be expressed to be taken in 
the name of the President.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the 
President shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules1 to 
be made by the President, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so 
authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order 
or instrument made or executed by the President.
(3) The President shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of 
the business of the Government of India, and for the allocation among 
Ministers of the said business.
2(4)      * 
              * 
*  
*
______________________________________________
1. See notifin No. S.O. 2297, dated the 3rd November, 1958, Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Pt. II, Sec. 3 (ii),   p. 1315, as amended from time to time.
2. Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s.14 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 12 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
36
78. Duties of Prime Minister as respects the furnishing of information 
to the President, etc.—It shall be the duty of the Prime Minister—
(a) to communicate to the President all decisions of the Council of 
Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the Union and 
proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the 
affairs of the Union and proposals for legislation as the President may 
call for; and
(c) if the President so requires, to submit for the consideration of the 
Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a 
Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.
CHAPTER II.—PARLIAMENT 
General
 79. Constitution of Parliament.—There shall be a Parliament for the 
Union which shall consist of the President and two Houses to be known 
respectively as the Council of States and the House of the People.
80. Composition of the Council of States.—(1) 1[2*** The Council of 
States] shall consist of—
(a) twelve members to be nominated by the President in accordance 
with the provisions of clause (3); and
(b) not more than two hundred and thirty-eight representatives of 
the States 3[and of the Union territories].
(2) The allocation of seats in the Council of States to be filled by 
representatives of the States 3[and of the Union territories] shall be in 
accordance with the provisions in that behalf contained in the Fourth Schedule.
(3) The members to be nominated by the President under sub-clause (a) 
of clause (1) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical 
experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
Literature, science, art and social service.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3, for "The Council 
of States" (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
2. The words "Subject to the provisions of para. 4 of the Tenth Schedule," omitted by the 
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
3. Added by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
37
(4) The representatives of each State 1*** in the Council of States shall 
be elected by the elected members of the Legislative Assembly of the State in 
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the 
single transferable vote.
(5) The representatives of the 2[Union territories] in the Council of States 
shall be chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law prescribe.
3[81. Composition of the House of the People.—(1) 4[Subject to the 
provisions of article 331 5***], the House of the People shall consist of—
(a) not more than 6[five hundred and thirty members] chosen by 
direct election from territorial constituencies in the States; and 
(b) not more than 7[twenty members] to represent the Union 
territories, chosen in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.
(2) For the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (1),—
(a) there shall be allotted to each State a number of seats in the House 
of the People in such manner that the ratio between that number and the 
population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all States; 
and 
(b) each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such 
manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and 
the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as practicable, the same 
throughout the State:
8[Provided that the provisions of sub-clause (a) of this clause shall not be 
applicable for the purpose of allotment of seats in the House of the People to 
any State so long as the population of that State does not exceed six millions.]
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid, for "States specified in Part C of First Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid. for arts. 81 and 82 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 4, for "subject to the 
provisions of art. 331" (w.e.f. 1-3-1975).
5. The words and figure "and para. 4 of the Tenth Schedule" omitted by the Constitution 
(Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
6. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for 
"five hundred and twenty-five members" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 2, for "twenty-five 
members" (w.e.f. 17-10-1973).
8. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 17-10-1973).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
38
(3) In this article, the expression “population” means the population as 
ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant figures have been 
published: 
1[Provided that the reference in this clause to the last preceding census of 
which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the relevant figures for 
the first census taken after the year 2[2026] have been published, 3[be 
construed,—
(i) for the purposes of sub-clause (a) of clause (2) and the proviso to 
that clause, as a reference to the 1971 census; and
(ii) for the purposes of sub-clause (b) of clause (2) as a reference to 
the 4[2001] census.]]
  82. Readjustment after each census.—Upon the completion of each 
census, the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States and the 
division of each State into territorial constituencies shall be readjusted by such 
authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law determine:
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the 
House of the People until the dissolution of the then existing House:
5[Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date 
as the President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, 
any election to the House may be held on the basis of the territorial 
constituencies existing before such readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken 
after the year 6[2026] have been published, it shall not be necessary to 
7[readjust,—
______________________________________________
1. Added by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 15 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 3, for "2000"
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
3. Subs. by s.3, ibid, for certain words (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for "1991" 
(w.e.f. 22-6-2003).
5. Ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 16 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 4, for "2000"
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
7. Subs. by s.4,  ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
39
(i) the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the States as 
readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and  
(ii) the division of each State into territorial constituencies as may be 
readjusted on the basis of the 1[2001] census, 
under this article.]]
83. Duration of Houses of Parliament.—(1) The Council of States 
shall not be subject to dissolution, but as nearly as possible one-third of the 
members thereof shall retire as soon as may be on the expiration of every 
second year in accordance with the provisions made in that behalf by 
Parliament by law. 
(2) The House of the People, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for 
2[five years] from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the 
expiration of the said period of 2[five years] shall operate as a dissolution of 
the House:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is 
in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one 
year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after 
the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
84. Qualification for membership of Parliament.—A person shall not 
be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in Parliament unless he—
3[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some 
person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or 
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third 
Schedule;]
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Council of States, not less than thirty 
years of age and, in the case of a seat in the House of the People, not less 
than twenty-five years of age; and
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that 
behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3, for "1991" 
(w.e.f. 22-6-2003).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 17, for "five years" 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 
1978, s. 13, for "six years" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3, for cl.(a)
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
40
1[85. Sessions of Parliament, prorogation and dissolution.—(1) The 
President shall from time to time summon each House of Parliament to meet at 
such time and place as he thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between 
its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the 
next session.
(2) The President may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the Houses or either House;
(b) dissolve the House of the People.]
86. Right of President to address and send messages to Houses.—(1) 
The President may address either House of Parliament or both Houses 
assembled together, and for that purpose require the attendance of members. 
(2) The President may send messages to either House of Parliament, 
whether with respect to a Bill then pending in Parliament or otherwise, and a 
House to which any message is so sent shall with all convenient despatch 
consider any matter required by the message to be taken into consideration.
87. Special address by the President.—(1) At the commencement of 
2[the first session after each general election to the House of the People and at 
the commencement of the first session of each year] the President shall address 
both Houses of Parliament assembled together and inform Parliament of the 
causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of 
either House for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters referred to 
in such address 3***.
88. Rights of Ministers and Attorney-General as respects Houses.—
Every Minister and the Attorney-General of India shall have the right to speak 
in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, either House, any joint 
sitting of the Houses, and any committee of Parliament of which he may be 
named a member, but shall not by virtue of this article be entitled to vote.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 6, for art. 85
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 7, for "every session"
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
3. The words "and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the House" 
omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
41
Officers of Parliament
89. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council of States.—(1) 
The Vice- President of India shall be ex officio Chairman of the Council of States.
(2) The Council of States shall, as soon as may be, choose a member of 
the Council to be Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of 
Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member to 
be Deputy Chairman thereof.
90. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the office of 
Deputy Chairman.—A member holding office as Deputy Chairman of the 
Council of States—
(a)  shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Chairman, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council 
passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved 
unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the 
resolution.
91. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the 
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.—(1) While the office of 
Chairman is vacant, or during any period when the Vice-President is acting as, 
or discharging the functions of, President, the duties of the office shall be 
performed by the Deputy Chairman, or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is 
also vacant, by such member of the Council of States as the President may 
appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council of 
States the Deputy Chairman, or, if he is also absent, such person as may be 
determined by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person is present, 
such other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.
92. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any 
sitting of the Council of States, while any resolution for the removal of the 
Vice-President from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while 
any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under 
consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside, 
and the provisions of clause (2) of article 91 shall apply in relation to every 
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman, or, 
as the case may be, the Deputy Chairman, is absent.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
42
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take 
part in the proceedings of, the Council of States while any resolution for the 
removal of the Vice-President from his office is under consideration in the 
Council, but, notwithstanding anything in article 100, shall not be entitled to 
vote at all on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings.
93. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.—
The House of the People shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of the 
House to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and, so often as 
the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes vacant, the House shall 
choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
94. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.— A member holding office as Speaker or 
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People— 
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the House of 
the People;
(b) may at any time, by writing under his hand addressed, if such 
member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is 
the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the House of 
the People passed by a majority of all the then members of the House:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved 
unless at least fourteen days’ notice has been given of the intention to move the 
resolution:
Provided further that, whenever the House of the People is dissolved, the 
Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of 
the House of the People after the dissolution.
95. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the 
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.—(1) While the office of Speaker 
is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, 
if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the House of 
the People as the President may appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the House of the 
People the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined 
by the rules of procedure of the House, or, if no such person is present, such other 
person as may be determined by the House, shall act as Speaker.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
43
96. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any 
sitting of the House of the People, while any resolution for the removal of the 
Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any 
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under 
consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside, and 
the provisions of clause (2) of article 95 shall apply in relation to every such 
sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker, or, as the 
case may be, the Deputy Speaker, is absent. 
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take 
part in the proceedings of, the House of the People while any resolution for his 
removal from office is under consideration in the House and shall, 
notwithstanding anything in article 100, be entitled to vote only in the first 
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but 
not in the case of an equality of votes.
97. Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman 
and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker.—There shall be paid to the Chairman 
and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and to the Speaker and the 
Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, such salaries and allowances as may 
be respectively fixed by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so 
made, such salaries and allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.
98. Secretariat of Parliament.—(1) Each House of Parliament shall 
have a separate secretarial staff:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the 
creation of posts common to both Houses of Parliament.
(2) Parliament may by law regulate the recruitment, and the conditions 
of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of either House of 
Parliament.
(3) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (2), the President 
may, after consultation with the Speaker of the House of the People or the 
Chairman of the Council of States, as the case may be, make rules regulating 
the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the 
secretarial staff of the House of the People or the Council of States, and any 
rules so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any law made under 
the said clause.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
44
Conduct of Business
99. Oath or affirmation by members.—Every member of either House 
of Parliament shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the 
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or 
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule. 
100. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding 
vacancies and quorum.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, 
all questions at any sitting of either House or joint sitting of the Houses shall be 
determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other 
than the Speaker or person acting as Chairman or Speaker.
The Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the 
first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an 
equality of votes.
(2) Either House of Parliament shall have power to act notwithstanding 
any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in Parliament shall 
be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered subsequently that some person who 
was not entitled so to do sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.
1[(3) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the quorum to 
constitute a meeting of either House of Parliament shall be one-tenth of the 
total number of members of the House.
(4) If at any time during a meeting of a House there is no quorum, it shall 
be the duty of the Chairman or Speaker, or person acting as such, either to 
adjourn the House or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.]
Disqualifications of Members
101. Vacation of seats.— (1) No person shall be a member of both 
Houses of Parliament and provision shall be made by Parliament by law for the 
vacation by a person who is chosen a member of both Houses of his seat in one 
House or the other.
______________________________________________
1. Cls. (3) and (4) omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 18 (date not 
notified). This amendment was omitted by the  Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, 
s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
45
(2) No person shall be a member both of Parliament and of a House of 
the Legislature of a State 1***, and if a person is chosen a member both of 
Parliament and of a House of the Legislature of 2[a State], then, at the 
expiration of such period as may be specified in rules  made by the President, 
that person’s seat in Parliament shall become vacant, unless he has previously 
resigned his seat in the Legislature of the State.
(3) If a member of either House of Parliament—
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 
3[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 102]; or
4[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, and his resignation is 
accepted by the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
5[Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b),
if from information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he 
thinks fit, the Chairman or the Speaker, as the case may be, is satisfied that 
such resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such 
resignation.]
(4) If for a period of sixty days a member of either House of Parliament 
is without permission of the House absent from all meetings thereof, the House 
may declare his seat vacant:
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall 
be taken of any period during which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for 
more than four consecutive days.
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "such a State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950, published with the 
Ministry of Law, notifn. No. F. 46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, P. 678.
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 2, for "cl. (1) of art.
102" (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-5-1974).
5. Ins. by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-5-1974).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
46
102. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be 
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of 
Parliament— 
1[(a)  if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India 
or the Government of any State, other than an office declared by 
Parliament by law not to disqualify its holder;]
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
court;
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the 
citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of 
allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. 
2[Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause] a person shall not be 
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the 
Government of any State by reason only that he is a Minister either for the 
Union or for such State.
3[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of either House 
of Parliament if he is so disqualified under the Tenth Schedule.]
4[103. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.—
(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of either House of Parliament 
has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) of 
article 102, the question shall be referred for the decision of the President and 
his decision shall be final.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 19 to read as "(a) if
he holds any such office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of 
any State as is declared by Parliament by law to disqualify its holder" (date not 
notified). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 3, for "(2) for the 
purposes of this art." (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 20, for art. 103
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 14, for art. 103 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
47
(2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the President shall 
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such 
opinion.] 
104. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation 
under article 99 or when not qualified or when disqualified.—If a person 
sits or votes as a member of either House of Parliament before he has complied 
with the requirements of article 99, or when he knows that he is not qualified or 
that he is disqualified for membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so 
doing by the provisions of any law made by Parliament, he shall be liable in 
respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred 
rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of Parliament and its Members
105. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Parliament and of the 
members and committees thereof.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of 
Parliament, there shall be freedom of speech in Parliament.
(2) No member of Parliament shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in 
respect of anything said or any vote given by him in Parliament or any committee 
thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the 
authority of either House of Parliament of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
1[(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of each 
House of Parliament, and of the members and the committees of each House, 
shall be such as may from time to time be defined by Parliament by law, and,
until so defined, 2[shall be those of that House and of its members and 
committees immediately before the coming into force of section 15 of the 
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978.]].
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 21 (date to be 
notified). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 15, for certain 
words (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
48
(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to 
persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to speak in, and 
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of Parliament or any 
committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of Parliament. 
106. Salaries and allowances of members.—Members of either House 
of Parliament shall be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances as may 
from time to time be determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in 
that respect is so made, allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as 
were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in 
the case of members of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India.
Legislative Procedure 
107. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(1) Subject 
to the provisions of articles 109 and 117 with respect to Money Bills and other 
financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of Parliament. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 108 and 109, a Bill shall not be 
deemed to have been passed by the Houses of Parliament unless it has been 
agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or with such amendments 
only as are agreed to by both Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in Parliament shall not lapse by reason of the 
prorogation of the Houses.
(4) A Bill pending in the Council of States which has not been passed by 
the House of the People shall not lapse on a dissolution of the House of the 
People.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the House of the People, or which having 
been passed by the House of the People is pending in the Council of States, 
shall, subject to the provisions of article 108, lapse on a dissolution of the 
House of the People.
108. Joint sitting of both Houses in certain cases.—(1) If after a Bill 
has been passed by one House and transmitted to the other House—
(a) the Bill is rejected by the other House; or
(b) the Houses have finally disagreed as to the amendments to be 
made in the Bill; or
(c) more than six months elapse from the date of the reception of the 
Bill by the other House without the Bill being passed by it,

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
49
the President may, unless the Bill has elapsed by reason of a dissolution of the 
House of the People, notify to the Houses by message if they are sitting or by 
public notification if they are not sitting, his intention to summon them to meet 
in a joint sitting for the purpose of deliberating and voting on the Bill:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to a Money Bill.
(2) In reckoning any such period of six months as is referred to in 
clause (1), no account shall be taken of any period during which the House 
referred to in sub-clause (c) of that clause is prorogued or adjourned for more 
than four consecutive days. 
(3) Where the President has under clause (1) notified his intention of 
summoning the Houses to meet in a joint sitting, neither House shall proceed 
further with the Bill, but the President may at any time after the date of his 
notification summon the Houses to meet in a joint sitting for the purpose specified 
in the notification and, if he does so, the Houses shall meet accordingly.
(4) If at the joint sitting of the two Houses the Bill, with such amendments, 
if any, as are agreed to in joint sitting, is passed by a majority of the total number 
of members of both Houses present and voting, it shall be deemed for the 
purposes of this Constitution to have been passed by both Houses:
Provided that at a joint sitting—
(a) if the Bill, having been passed by one House, has not been passed 
by the other House with amendments and returned to the House in which 
it originated, no amendment shall be proposed to the Bill other than such 
amendments (if any) as are made necessary by the delay in the passage 
of the Bill;
(b) if the Bill has been so passed and returned, only such amendments as 
aforesaid shall be proposed to the Bill and such other amendments as are 
relevant to the matters with respect to which the Houses  have not agreed,
and the decision of the person presiding as to the amendments which are admissible 
under this clause shall be final.
(5) A joint sitting may be held under this article and a Bill passed 
thereat, notwithstanding that a dissolution of the House of the People has 
intervened since the President notified his intention to summon the Houses to 
meet therein.
109. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill 
shall not be introduced in the Council of States.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
50
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the House of the People it 
shall be transmitted to the Council of States for its recommendations and the 
Council of States shall within a period of fourteen days from the date of its 
receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the House of the People with its 
recommendations and the House of the People may thereupon either accept or 
reject all or any of the recommendations of the Council of States.
(3) If the House of the People accepts any of the recommendations of the 
Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by both 
Houses with the amendments recommended by the Council of States and 
accepted by the House of the People.
(4) If the House of the People does not accept any of the 
recommendations of the Council of States, the Money Bill shall be deemed to 
have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the 
House of the People without any of the amendments recommended by the 
Council of States.
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the House of the People and transmitted to 
the Council of States for its recommendations is not returned to the House of 
the People within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be deemed to have 
been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period in the form in 
which it was passed by the House of the People.
110. Definition of “Money Bills”.—(1) For the purposes of this 
Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions 
dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any 
tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any 
guarantee by the Government of India, or the amendment of the law with 
respect to any financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by 
the Government of India;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund of 
India, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys from any 
such Fund; 
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of India or the increasing of the amount of any such 
expenditure;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
51
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of India 
or the public account of India or the custody or issue of such money or 
the audit of the accounts of the Union or of a State; or 
(g) any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in  
sub-clauses (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it 
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the 
demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by 
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or 
regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill is a Money Bill or not, the 
decision of the Speaker of the House of the People thereon shall be final.
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted 
to the Council of States under article 109, and when it is presented to the 
President for assent under article 111, the certificate of the Speaker of the 
House of the People signed by him that it is a Money Bill.
111. Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Houses of 
Parliament, it shall be presented to the President, and the President shall declare 
either that he assents to the Bill, or that he withholds assent therefrom: 
Provided that the President may, as soon as possible after the 
presentation to him of a Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill 
to the Houses with a message requesting that they will reconsider the Bill or 
any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the desirability 
of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message, 
and when a Bill is so returned, the Houses shall reconsider the Bill accordingly, 
and if the Bill is passed again by the Houses with or without amendment and 
presented to the President for assent, the President shall not withhold assent 
therefrom.
Procedure in Financial Matters
112. Annual financial statement.—(1) The President shall in respect of 
every financial year cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament a 
statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Government of India 
for that year, in this Part referred to as the "annual financial statement''.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial 
statement shall show separately— 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
52
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this 
Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of 
India; and
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be 
made from the Consolidated Fund of India, 
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure. 
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of  India—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the President and other 
expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Chairman and the Deputy 
Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and the Deputy 
Speaker of the House of the People;
(c) debt charges for which the Government of India is liable 
including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and 
other expenditure relating to the raising of loans and the service and 
redemption of debt;
(d) (i) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in 
respect of Judges of the Supreme Court;
(ii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of the Federal 
Court;
(iii) the pensions payable to or in respect of Judges of any High 
Court which exercises jurisdiction in relation to any area included in the 
territory of India or which at any time before the commencement of this 
Constitution exercised jurisdiction in relation to any area included in 
1[a Governor's Province of the Dominion of India];
(e) the salary, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India;
(f) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of 
any court or arbitral tribunal;
(g) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution or by 
Parliament by law to be so charged.
113. Procedure in Parliament with respect to estimates.—(1) So 
much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated 
Fund of India shall not be submitted to the vote of Parliament, but nothing in 
this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in either House of 
Parliament of any of those estimates.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for 
"a Province corresponding to a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule"
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
53
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be 
submitted in the form of demands for grants to the House of the People, and the 
House of the People shall have power to assent, or to refuse to assent, to any 
demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount 
specified therein. 
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation 
of the President. 
114. Appropriation Bills.—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under 
article 113 have been made by the House of the People, there shall be 
introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India of all moneys required to meet— 
(a) the grants so made by the House of the People; and
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India but 
not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously 
laid before Parliament.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in either House of 
Parliament which will have the effect of varying the amount or altering the 
destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of any expenditure 
charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and the decision of the person 
presiding as to whether an amendment is inadmissible under this clause shall be 
final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 115 and 116, no money shall be 
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of India except under appropriation 
made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
115. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(1) The President 
shall—
  (a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the 
provisions of article 114 to be expended for a particular service for the 
current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that 
year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for 
supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not 
contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year; or
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial 
year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament another statement 
showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to 
the House of the People a demand for such excess, as the case  may be.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
54
(2) The provisions of articles 112, 113 and 114 shall have effect in 
relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law 
to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand 
as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the 
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be 
made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India to meet such expenditure or grant.
116. Votes 
on 
account, 
votes 
of 
credit 
and 
exceptional          
grants.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this 
Chapter, the House of the People shall have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated 
expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of 
the procedure prescribed in article 113 for the voting of such grant and 
the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 114 in 
relation to that expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the 
resources of India when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite 
character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details 
ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current 
service of any financial year,
and Parliament shall have power to authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from 
the Consolidated Fund of India for the purposes for which the said grants are made.
(2) The provisions of articles 113 and 114 shall have effect in relation to 
the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that 
clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any 
expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made 
for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund 
of India to meet such expenditure.
117. Special provisions as to financial Bills.—(1) A Bill or amendment 
making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of 
clause (1) of article 110 shall not be introduced or moved except on the 
recommendation of the President and a Bill making such provision shall not be 
introduced in the Council of States:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for 
the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of 
any tax.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
55
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any 
of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of 
fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for 
licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the 
imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local 
authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India shall not be passed by either 
House of Parliament unless the President has recommended to that House the 
consideration of the Bill.
Procedure Generally
118. Rules of procedure.—(1) Each House of Parliament may make 
rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, its procedure
and the conduct of its business.
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and 
standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution with respect to the Legislature of the Dominion of India shall have 
effect in relation to Parliament subject to such modifications and adaptations as 
may be made therein by the Chairman of the Council of States or the Speaker 
of the House of the People, as the case may be.
(3) The President, after consultation with the Chairman of the Council of 
States and the Speaker of the House of the People, may make rules as to the 
procedure with respect to joint sittings of, and communications between, the 
two Houses.
(4) At a joint sitting of the two Houses the Speaker of the House of the 
People, or in his absence such person as may be determined by rules of 
procedure made under clause (3), shall preside.
119. Regulation by law of procedure in Parliament in relation to 
financial business.— Parliament may, for the purpose of the timely completion 
of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of, and the conduct of 
business in, each House of Parliament in relation to any financial matter or to 
any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India, 
and, if and so far as any provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any 
rule made by a House of Parliament under clause (1) of article 118 or with any 
rule or standing order having effect in relation to Parliament under clause (2) of 
that article, such provision shall prevail.
______________________________________________
The brackets and words "(including the quorum to constitute a meeting of the House" 
ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 22 (date not notified). 
This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 
1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
56
120. Language to be used in Parliament.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything in  Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article 348, business in 
Parliament shall be transacted in Hindi or in English: 
Provided that the Chairman of the Council of States or Speaker of the 
House of the People, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may permit 
any member who cannot adequately express himself in Hindi or in English to 
address the House in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless Parliament by law otherwise provides, this article shall, after 
the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the commencement of this 
Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in English” were omitted 
therefrom. 
121. Restriction on discussion in Parliament.—No discussion shall 
take place in Parliament with respect to the conduct of any Judge of the 
Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties except upon a 
motion for presenting an address to the President praying for the removal of the 
Judge as hereinafter provided.
122. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Parliament.—(1) The 
validity of any proceedings in Parliament shall not be called in question on the 
ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.
(2) No officer or member of Parliament in whom powers are vested by 
or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct of business, 
or for maintaining order, in Parliament shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any 
court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.
CHAPTER III.—LEGISLATIVE POWERS OF THE PRESIDENT
123. Power of President to promulgate Ordinances during recess of 
Parliament.—(1) If at any time, except when both Houses of Parliament are in 
session, the President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it 
necessary for him to take immediate action, he may promulgate such 
Ordinances as the circumstances appear to him to require.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same 
force and effect as an Act of Parliament, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament and shall cease to 
operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of Parliament, 
or, if before the expiration of that period resolutions disapproving it are 
passed by both Houses, upon the passing of the second of those 
resolutions; and

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
57
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the President.
Explanation.—Where the Houses of Parliament are summoned to 
reassemble on different dates, the period of six weeks shall be reckoned from 
the later of those dates for the purposes of this clause. 
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision 
which Parliament would not under this Constitution be competent to enact, it 
shall be void. 
1(4)*                       *                        *                      *     
*  
CHAPTER IV.—THE UNION JUDICIARY
124. Establishment and constitution of the Supreme Court.—(1) 
There shall be a Supreme Court of India consisting of a Chief Justice of India 
and, until Parliament by law prescribes a larger number, of not more than 
[seven]other Judges.
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal 2[on the recommendation of the 
National Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A] and 
shall hold office until he attains the age of sixty-five years:
3[*
*
*
*
*]
4[Provided that]—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
President, resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office in the manner 
provided in clause (4).
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2 (with retrospective effect) and
omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 16 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).  
Now “thirty-three” vide the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Amendment Act, 2019 (37 of  2019), 
s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-8-2019).
2.  Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 2, for "after consultation with 
such of the Judges of the Supreme Court and of the High Court in the States as the President may 
deem necessary for the purpose" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the 
Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and another Vs. 
Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
3. The first proviso was omitted by s. 2, ibid. The proviso was as under:—
"Provided that in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief 
Justice of India shall always be consulted:" This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and another Vs. Union of 
India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid. for "provided further that" This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court in the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and another Vs Union of India 
judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
58
1[(2A) The age of a Judge of the Supreme Court shall be determined by 
such authority and in such manner as Parliament may by law provide.]
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court unless he is a citizen of India and— 
(a) has been for at least five years a Judge of a High Court or of 
two or more such Courts in succession; or
(b) has been for at least ten years an advocate of a High Court or 
of two or more such Courts in succession; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, a distinguished jurist.
Explanation I.—In this clause "High Court'' means a High Court which 
exercises, or which at any time before the commencement of this Constitution 
exercised, jurisdiction in any part of the territory of India.
Explanation II.—In computing for the purpose of this clause the period 
during which a person has been an advocate, any period during which a person has 
held judicial office not inferior to that of a district judge after he became an 
advocate shall be included.
(4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office 
except by an order of the President passed after an address by each House of 
Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of that House and by a 
majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that House present and voting 
has been presented to the President in the same session for such removal on the 
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity.
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of an 
address and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity of a 
Judge under clause (4).
(6) Every person appointed to be a Judge of the Supreme Court shall, 
before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the President, or 
some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according 
to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(7) No person who has held office as a Judge of the Supreme Court shall 
plead or act in any court or before any authority within the territory of India.
2[124A. National Judicial Appointments Commission.—(1) There 
shall be a Commission to be known as the National Judicial Appointments
Commission consisting of the following, namely:—
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 2  (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 3  (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This 
amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-
on-Record Association and another Vs Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015,
AIR 2016 SC 117.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
59
(a) the Chief Justice of India, Chairperson, ex officio;
(b) two other senior Judges of the Supreme Court next to the 
Chief Justice of India––Members, ex officio;
(c) the Union Minister in charge of Law and Justice––Member,
ex officio;
(d) two eminent persons to be nominated by the committee 
consisting of the Prime Minister, the Chief Justice of India and the 
Leader of Opposition in the House of the People or where there is no 
such Leader of Opposition, then, the Leader of single largest Opposition 
Party in the House of the People––Members: 
Provided that one of the eminent person shall be nominated from 
amongst the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes, Other Backward Classes, Minorities or Women:
Provided further that an eminent person shall be nominated for a 
period of three years and shall not be eligible for renomination.
(2) No act or proceedings of the National Judicial Appointments 
Commission shall be questioned or be invalidated merely on the ground of the 
existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Commission.
124B. Functions of Commission.––It shall be the duty of the National 
Judicial Appointments Commission to—
(a) recommend persons for appointment as Chief Justice of India, 
Judges of the Supreme Court, Chief Justices of High Courts and other 
Judges of High Courts;
(b) recommend transfer of Chief Justices and other Judges of High 
Courts from one High Court to any other High Court; and
(c) ensure that the person recommended is of ability and integrity.
124C. Power of Parliament to make law.––Parliament may, by law, 
regulate the procedure for the appointment of Chief Justice of India and other 
Judges of the Supreme Court and Chief Justices and other Judges of High 
Courts and empower the Commission to lay down by regulations the procedure 
for the discharge of its functions, the manner of selection of persons for
appointment and such other matters as may be considered necessary by it.]
125. Salaries, etc., of Judges.— 1[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges 
of the Supreme Court such salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law 
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries as are specified in 
the Second Schedule.]
(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such privileges and allowances and to such 
rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be 
determined by or under law made by Parliament and, until so determined, to such 
privileges, allowances and rights as are specified in the Second Schedule:
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2, for cl. (1)     
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
60
Provided that neither the privileges nor the allowances of a Judge nor his 
rights in respect of leave of absence or pension shall be varied to his 
disadvantage after his appointment.
126. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.—When the office of Chief 
Justice of India is vacant or when the Chief Justice is, by reason of absence or 
otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office 
shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as the President 
may appoint for the purpose. 
127. Appointment of ad hoc Judges.—(1) If at any time there should 
not be a quorum of the Judges of the Supreme Court available to hold or 
continue any session of the Court,
1[the National Judicial Appointments 
Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of India, may with 
the previous consent of the President] and after consultation with the Chief 
Justice of the High Court concerned, request in writing the attendance at the 
sittings of the Court, as an ad hoc Judge, for such period as may be necessary, 
of a Judge of a High Court duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court to be designated by the Chief Justice of India.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Judge who has been so designated, in 
priority to other duties of his office, to attend the sittings of the Supreme Court 
at the time and for the period for which his attendance is required, and while so 
attending he shall have all the jurisdiction, powers and privileges, and shall 
discharge the duties, of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
128. Attendance of retired Judges at sittings of the Supreme  
Court.—Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, 2[the National Judicial 
Appointments Commission] may at any time, with the previous consent of the 
President, request any person who has held the office of a Judge of the 
Supreme Court or of the Federal Court 3[or who has held the office of a Judge 
of a High Court and is duly qualified for appointment as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court] to sit and act as a Judge of the Supreme Court, and every such 
person so requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such 
allowances as the President may by order determine and have all the 
jurisdiction, powers and privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, 
a Judge of that Court:
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 4,  for "the Chief 
Justice of India may, with the previous consent of the President" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). 
This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme 
Court Advocates-on-Record Association and another vs. Union of India in its 
judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for "the Chief Justice of India" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment 
has been struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-
on-Record Association and another Vs. Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-
2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
61
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such 
person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that Court unless he consents so 
to do.  
129. Supreme Court to be a court of record.—The Supreme Court 
shall be a court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including 
the power to punish for contempt of itself. 
130. Seat of Supreme Court.—The Supreme Court shall sit in Delhi or 
in such other place or places, as the Chief Justice of India may, with the 
approval of the President, from time to time, appoint. 
131. Original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.—Subject to the 
provisions of this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, to the exclusion of any 
other court, have original jurisdiction in any dispute— 
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on one 
side and one or more other States on the other; or 
(c) between two or more States, 
if and in so far as the dispute involves any question (whether of law or fact) on which 
the existence or extent of a legal right depends:
1[Provided that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to a dispute arising 
out of any treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar 
instrument which, having been entered into or executed before the 
commencement of this Constitution, continues in operation after such 
commencement, or which provides that the said jurisdiction shall not extend to 
such a dispute.]
2[131A. Exclusive jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to 
questions as to constitutional validity of Central laws.].—Omitted by the 
Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 4 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
132. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from 
High Courts in certain cases.—(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court 
from any judgment, decree or final order of a High Court in the territory of 
India, whether in a civil, criminal or other proceeding, 3[if the High Court 
certifies under article 134A] that the case involves a substantial question of law 
as to the interpretation of this Constitution.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 5, for the proviso 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 17, for "if the High 
Court certifies" (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
62
1(2)*                       *                      *                       *      
*
(3) Where such a certificate is given, 2*** any party in the case may 
appeal to the Supreme Court on the ground that any such question as aforesaid 
has been wrongly decided 2***.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this article, the expression “final 
order” includes an order deciding an issue which, if decided in favour of the 
appellant, would be sufficient for the final disposal of the case.
133. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in appeals from 
High Courts in regard to civil matters.—3[(1) An appeal shall lie to the 
Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or final order in a civil proceeding 
of a High Court in the territory of India 4[if the High Court certifies under 
article   134A—] 
(a) that the case involves a substantial question of law of general 
importance; and
(b) that in the opinion of the High Court the said question needs to be 
decided by the Supreme Court.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything in article 132, any party appealing to the 
Supreme Court under clause (1) may urge as one of the grounds in such appeal 
that a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution has 
been wrongly decided. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, no appeal shall, unless Parliament 
by law otherwise provides, lie to the Supreme Court from the judgment, decree or final 
order of one Judge of a High Court.
134. Appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to 
criminal matters.—(1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any 
judgment, final order or sentence in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in 
the territory of India if the High Court—
(a) has on appeal reversed an order of acquittal of an accused person 
and sentenced him to death; or 
(b) has withdrawn for trial before itself any case from any court 
subordinate to its authority and has in such trial convicted the accused 
person and sentenced him to death; or 
(c) 5[certifies under article 134A] that the case is a fit one for appeal 
to the Supreme Court:
______________________________________________
1. Cl. (2) omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 17, for "if 
the High Court certifies" (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
2. Certain words omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-8-1979). 
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirtieth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2, for cl. (1) 
(w.e.f. 27-2-1973).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.18, for "if the High 
Court certifies.—" (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
5. Subs. by s. 19,  ibid., for "certifies" (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
63
Provided that an appeal under sub-clause (c) shall lie subject to such 
provisions as may be made in that behalf under clause (1) of article 145 and to 
such conditions as the High Court may establish or require.
(2) Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court any further 
powers to entertain and hear appeals from any judgment, final order or sentence 
in a criminal proceeding of a High Court in the territory of India subject to such 
conditions and limitations as may be specified in such law.
1[134A. Certificate for appeal to the Supreme Court.—Every High 
Court, passing or making a judgment, decree, final order, or sentence, referred to 
in clause (1) of article 132 or clause (1) of article 133, or clause (1) of article 
134,— 
(a) may, if it deems fit so to do, on its own motion; and  
(b) shall, if an oral application is made, by or on behalf of the party 
aggrieved, immediately after the passing or making of such judgment, 
decree, final order or sentence,
determine, as soon as may be after such passing or making, the question 
whether a certificate of the nature referred to in clause (1) of article 132, or 
clause (1) of article 133 or, as the case may be, sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of 
article 134, may be given in respect of that case.]
135. Jurisdiction and powers of the Federal Court under existing 
law to be exercisable by the Supreme Court.—Until Parliament by law 
otherwise provides, the Supreme Court shall also have jurisdiction and powers 
with respect to any matter to which the provisions of article 133 or article 134 
do not apply if jurisdiction and powers in relation to that matter were 
exercisable by the Federal Court immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution under any existing law.
136. Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, the Supreme Court may, in its 
discretion, grant special leave to appeal from any judgment, decree, 
determination, sentence or order in any cause or matter passed or made by any 
court or tribunal in the territory of India.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply to any judgment, determination, 
sentence or order passed or made by any court or tribunal constituted by or 
under any law relating to the Armed Forces.
137. Review of judgments or orders by the Supreme Court.—Subject 
to the provisions of any law made by Parliament or any rules made under 
article 145, the Supreme Court shall have power to review any judgment 
pronounced or order made by it.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
64
138. Enlargement of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.—(1) The 
Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers with respect to 
any of the matters in the Union List as Parliament may by law confer.
(2) The Supreme Court shall have such further jurisdiction and powers 
with respect to any matter as the Government of India and the Government of 
any State may by special agreement confer, if Parliament by law provides for 
the exercise of such jurisdiction and powers by the Supreme Court. 
139. Conferment on the Supreme Court of powers to issue certain 
writs.—Parliament may by law confer on the Supreme Court power to issue 
directions, orders or writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, 
mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, or any of them, for any 
purposes other than those mentioned in clause (2) of article 32.
1[139A. Transfer of certain cases.—2[(1) Where cases involving the 
same or substantially the same questions of law are pending before the 
Supreme Court and one or more High Courts or before two or more High 
Courts and the Supreme Court is satisfied on its own motion or on an 
application made by the Attorney-General of India or by a party to any such 
case that such questions are substantial questions of general importance, the 
Supreme Court may withdraw the case or cases pending before the High Court 
or the High Courts and dispose of all the cases itself:
Provided that the Supreme Court may after determining the said 
questions of law return any case so withdrawn together with a copy of its 
judgment on such questions to the High Court from which the case has been 
withdrawn, and the High Court shall on receipt thereof, proceed to dispose of 
the case in conformity with such judgment.]
(2) The Supreme Court may, if it deems it expedient so to do for the ends 
of justice, transfer any case, appeal or other proceedings pending before any 
High Court to any other High Court.]
140. Ancillary powers of the Supreme Court.—Parliament may by 
law make provision for conferring upon the Supreme Court such supplemental 
powers not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Constitution as may 
appear to be necessary or desirable for the purpose of enabling the Court more 
effectively to exercise the jurisdiction conferred upon it by or under this 
Constitution.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 24 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 21, for cl. (1) 
(w.e.f. 1-8-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
65
141. Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all courts.—
The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on all courts within 
the territory of India.
142. Enforcement of decrees and orders of the Supreme Court and 
orders as to discovery, etc.—(1) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its 
jurisdiction may pass such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing 
complete justice in any cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so 
passed or order so made shall be enforceable throughout the territory of India in 
such manner as may be prescribed by or under any law made by Parliament 
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the President 
may by order1 prescribe.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by 
Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects the whole of the territory of 
India, have all and every power to make any order for the purpose of securing 
the attendance of any person, the discovery or production of any documents, or 
the investigation or punishment of any contempt of itself. 
143. Power of the President to consult the Supreme Court.—(1) If at 
any time it appears to the President that a question of law or fact has arisen, or 
is likely to arise, which is of such a nature and of such public importance that it 
is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court upon it, he may refer 
the question to that Court for consideration and the Court may, after such 
hearing as it thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon.
(2) The President may, notwithstanding anything in 2*** the proviso to 
article 131, refer a dispute of the kind mentioned in the 3[said proviso] to the 
Supreme Court for opinion and the Supreme Court shall, after such hearing as it 
thinks fit, report to the President its opinion thereon. 
144. Civil and judicial authorities to act in aid of the Supreme 
Court.—All authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory of India shall act in 
aid of the Supreme Court.
4[144A. [Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to 
constitutional validity of laws.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third 
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).]
145. Rules of Court, etc.—(1) Subject to the provisions of any law 
made by Parliament, the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the 
approval of the President, make rules for regulating generally the practice and 
procedure of the Court including—
(a) rules as to the persons practising before the Court;
______________________________________________
1. See the Supreme Court (Decrees and Orders) Enforcement Order, 1954 (C.O. 47).
2. The words, brackets and figure "clause (i) of" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "said clause" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
66
(b) rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals and other matters 
pertaining to appeals including the time within which appeals to the 
Court are to be entered;
(c) rules as to the proceedings in the Court for the enforcement of 
any of the rights conferred by Part III; 
1[(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Court under 2[article 
139A];] 
(d) rules as to the entertainment of appeals under sub-clause (c) of 
clause (1) of article 134; 
(e) rules as to the conditions subject to which any judgment 
pronounced or order made by the Court may be reviewed and the 
procedure for such review including the time within which applications 
to the Court for such review are to be entered;
(f) rules as to the costs of and incidental to any proceedings in the 
Court and as to the fees to be charged in respect of proceedings therein; 
(g) rules as to the granting of bail; 
(h) rules as to stay of proceedings; 
(i) rules providing for the summary determination of any appeal 
which appears to the Court to be frivolous or vexatious or brought for 
the purpose of delay;
(j) rules as to the procedure for inquiries referred to in 
clause (1) of article 317.
(2) Subject to the 3[provisions of 4*** clause (3)], rules made under this 
article may fix the minimum number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose, 
and may provide for the powers of single Judges and Division Courts.
(3) 5[4***The minimum number] of Judges who are to sit for the purpose 
of deciding any case involving a substantial question of law as to the 
interpretation of this Constitution or for the purpose of hearing any reference 
under article 143 shall be five:
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6, for "articles 131A 
and 139A" (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for "provisions 
of clause (3)" (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 6 
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 26, for "The 
minimum number" (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
67
Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal under any of the 
provisions of this Chapter other than article 132 consists of less than five 
Judges and in the course of the hearing of the appeal the Court is satisfied that 
the appeal involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this 
Constitution the determination of which is necessary for the disposal of the 
appeal, such Court shall refer the question for opinion to a Court constituted as 
required by this clause for the purpose of deciding any case involving such a 
question and shall on receipt of the opinion dispose of the appeal in conformity 
with such opinion.
(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the Supreme Court save in open 
Court, and no report shall be made under article 143 save in accordance with an 
opinion also delivered in open Court.
(5) No judgment and no such opinion shall be delivered by the Supreme 
Court save with the concurrence of a majority of the Judges present at the 
hearing of the case, but nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent a 
Judge who does not concur from delivering a dissenting judgment or opinion.
146. Officers and servants and the expenses of the Supreme Court.—
(1) Appointments of officers and servants of the Supreme Court shall be made 
by the Chief Justice of India or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he 
may direct:
Provided that the President may by rule require that in such cases as may 
be specified in the rule, no person not already attached to the Court shall be 
appointed to any office connected with the Court, save after consultation with 
the Union Public Service Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the 
conditions of service of officers and servants of the Supreme Court shall be 
such as may be prescribed by  rules made by the Chief Justice of India or by 
some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice of 
India to make rules for the purpose:
Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they relate 
to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require the approval of the President.
(3) The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court, including all 
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and 
servants of the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India, 
and any fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
68
147. Interpretation.—In this Chapter and in Chapter V of Part VI, 
references to any substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this 
Constitution shall be construed as including references to any substantial 
question of law as to the interpretation of the Government of India Act, 1935 
(including any enactment amending or supplementing that Act), or of any 
Order in Council or order made thereunder, or of the Indian Independence 
Act, 1947, or of any order made thereunder. 
CHAPTER V.—COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL OF INDIA
148. Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.—(1) There shall be a 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India who shall be appointed by the 
President by warrant under his hand and seal and shall only be removed from 
office in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
(2) Every person appointed to be the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India shall, before he enters upon his office, make and subscribe before the 
President, or some person appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or 
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
(3) The salary and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by law and, 
until they are so determined, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule:
Provided that neither the salary of a Comptroller and Auditor-General 
nor his rights in respect of leave of absence, pension or age of retirement shall 
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall not be eligible for further 
office either under the Government of India or under the Government of any 
State after he has ceased to hold his office.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and of any law made by 
Parliament, the conditions of service of persons serving in the Indian Audit and 
Accounts Department and the administrative powers of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the 
President after consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(6) The administrative expenses of the office of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or 
in respect of persons serving in that office, shall be charged upon the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part V.—The Union)
69
149. Duties and powers of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.—
The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall perform such duties and exercise 
such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of the States and of 
any other authority or body as may be prescribed by or under any law made by 
Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall perform such 
duties and exercise such powers in relation to the accounts of the Union and of 
the States as were conferred on or exercisable by the Auditor-General of India 
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution in relation to the 
accounts of the Dominion of India and of the Provinces respectively.
1[150. Form of accounts of the Union and of the States.—The 
accounts of the Union and of the States shall be kept in such form as the 
President may, 2[on the advice of] the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India, prescribe.] 
151. Audit reports.—(1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India relating to the accounts of the Union shall be submitted to the 
President, who shall cause them to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
(2) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India relating 
to the accounts of a State shall be submitted to the Governor 3*** of the State, 
who shall cause them to be laid before the Legislature of the State. 
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 27, for art.150
(w.e.f. 1-4-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 22, for "after 
consultation with" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

70
PART VI
THE STATES 1*** 
CHAPTER I.—GENERAL
152. Definition.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, the 
expression “State” 2[does not include the State of Jammu and Kashmir].
CHAPTER II.—THE EXECUTIVE
The Governor 
153. Governors of States.—There shall be a Governor for each State:
3[Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent the appointment of 
the same person as Governor for two or more States.] 
154. Executive power of State.—(1) The executive power of the State 
shall be vested in the Governor and shall be exercised by him either directly or 
through officers subordinate to him in accordance with this Constitution. 
(2) Nothing in this article shall— 
(a) be deemed to transfer to the Governor any functions conferred by 
any existing law on any other authority; or
(b) prevent Parliament or the Legislature of the State from conferring 
by law functions on any authority subordinate to the Governor.
155. Appointment of Governor.—The Governor of a State shall be 
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
156. Term of office of Governor.—(1) The Governor shall hold office 
during the pleasure of the President.
(2) The Governor may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
President, resign his office.
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions of this article, a Governor shall 
hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office:
______________________________________________
1. The words "IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE" omitted by the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch. ibid., for "means a State specified in Part A of the First 
Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Added by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
71
Provided that a Governor shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his 
term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
157. Qualifications for appointment as Governor.—No person shall 
be eligible for appointment as Governor unless he is a citizen of India and has 
completed the age of thirty-five years.
158. Conditions of Governor's office.—(1) The Governor shall not be a 
member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any 
State specified in the First Schedule, and if a member of either House of 
Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any such State be appointed 
Governor, he shall be deemed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date 
on which he enters upon his office as Governor.
(2) The Governor shall not hold any other office of profit.
(3) The Governor shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of 
his official residences and shall be also entitled to such emoluments, 
allowances and privileges as may be determined by Parliament by law and, 
until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and 
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
1[(3A) Where the same person is appointed as Governor of two or more 
States, the emoluments and allowances payable to the Governor shall be allocated 
among the States in such proportion as the President may by order determine.]
(4) The emoluments and allowances of the Governor shall not be 
diminished during his term of office.
159. Oath or affirmation by the Governor.—Every Governor and 
every person discharging the functions of the Governor shall, before entering 
upon his office, make and subscribe in the presence of the Chief Justice of the 
High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the State, or, in his absence, the 
senior most Judge of that Court available, an oath or affirmation in the 
following form, that is to say—
“I,  A. B.,  do  swear in the name  of  God that  I will  faithfully execute the 
solemnly affirm
office of Governor (or discharge the functions of the Governor) of 
.........(name of the State) and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect 
and defend the Constitution and the law and that I will devote myself to the 
service and well-being of the people of ..……(name of the State).”.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
72
160. Discharge of the functions of the Governor in certain 
contingencies.—The President may make such provision as he thinks fit for the 
discharge of the functions of the Governor of a State in any contingency not 
provided for in this Chapter.
161. Power of Governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit 
or commute sentences in certain cases.—The Governor of a State shall have 
the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or remissions of punishment or 
to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any 
offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the 
State extends. 
162. Extent of executive power of State.—Subject to the provisions of 
this Constitution, the executive power of a State shall extend to the matters with 
respect to which the Legislature of the State has power to make laws:
Provided that in any matter with respect to which the Legislature of a 
State and Parliament have power to make laws, the executive power of the 
State shall be subject to, and limited by, the executive power expressly 
conferred by this Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the 
Union or authorities thereof.
Council of Ministers
163.  Council of Ministers to aid and advise Governor.—(1) There shall 
be a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the 
Governor in the exercise of his functions, except in so far as he is by or under this 
Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his discretion.
(2) If any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as 
respects which the Governor is by or under this Constitution required to act in 
his discretion, the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be final, and 
the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question on 
the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion.
(3) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by 
Ministers to the Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.
164. Other provisions as to Ministers.—(1) The Chief Minister shall 
be appointed by the Governor and the other Ministers shall be appointed by the 
Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister, and the Ministers shall hold 
office during the pleasure of the Governor:

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
73
Provided that in the States of 1[Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand], Madhya 
Pradesh and 2[Odisha] there shall be a Minister in charge of tribal welfare who 
may in addition be in charge of the welfare of the Scheduled Castes and 
backward classes or any other work. 
3[(1A) The total number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister, in 
the Council of Ministers in a State shall not exceed fifteen per cent. of the total 
number of members of the Legislative Assembly of that State:  
Provided that the number of Ministers, including the Chief Minister in a 
State shall not be less than twelve: 
Provided further that where the total number of Ministers including the 
Chief Minister in the Council of Ministers in any State at the commencement of 
the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003 exceeds the said fifteen 
per cent.  or the number specified in the first proviso, as the case may be, then 
the total number of Ministers in that State shall be brought in conformity with 
the provisions of this clause within six months from such date4 as the President 
may by public notification appoint.
(1B) A member of the Legislative Assembly of a State or either House of 
the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council belonging to any political 
party who is disqualified for being a member of that House under paragraph 2 
of the Tenth Schedule shall also be disqualified to be appointed as a Minister 
under clause (1) for duration of the period commencing from the date of his 
disqualification till the date on which the term of his office as such member 
would expire or where he contests any election to the Legislative Assembly  of 
a State or either House of the Legislature of a State having Legislative Council, 
as the case may be, before the expiry of such period, till the date on which he is 
declared elected, whichever is earlier.]
(2) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the 
Legislative Assembly of the State.
(3) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Governor shall 
administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set 
out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-fourth Amendment) Act, 2006, s. 2, for "Bihar" 
(w.e.f. 12-6-2006). 
2. Subs. by the Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011), s. 4, for "Orissa" 
(w.e.f. 1-11-2011).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).
4. 7-1-2004, vide notification number S.O. 21(E), dated 7-1-2004.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
74
(4) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is not a 
member of the Legislature of the State shall at the expiration of that period 
cease to be a Minister.
(5) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Legislature 
of the State may from time to time by law determine and, until the Legislature of the 
State so determines, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule. 
The Advocate-General for the State
165. Advocate-General for the State.—(1) The Governor of each State 
shall appoint a person who is qualified to be appointed a Judge of a High Court 
to be Advocate-General for the State.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Advocate-General to give advice to the 
Government of the State upon such legal matters, and to perform such other 
duties of a legal character, as may from time to time be referred or assigned to 
him by the Governor, and to discharge the functions conferred on him by or 
under this Constitution or any other law for the time being in force.
(3) The Advocate-General shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
Governor, and shall receive such remuneration as the Governor may determine.
Conduct of Government Business
166. Conduct of Business of the Government of a State.—(1) All 
executive action of the Government of a State shall be expressed to be taken in 
the name of the Governor.
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the 
Governor shall be authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to 
be made by the Governor, and the validity of an order or instrument which is so 
authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground that it is not an order 
or instrument made or executed by the Governor.
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient transaction of 
the business of the Government of the State, and for the allocation among 
Ministers of the said business in so far as it is not business with respect to which 
the Governor is by or under this Constitution required to act in his discretion.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
75
1(4)*                          *                           *                            *   
*
167. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of 
information to Governor, etc.—It shall be the duty of the Chief Minister of 
each State—  
(a) to communicate to the Governor of the State all decisions of the 
Council of Ministers relating to the administration of the affairs of the 
State and proposals for legislation;
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the 
affairs of the State and proposals for legislation as the Governor may call 
for; and 
(c) if the Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the 
Council of Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a 
Minister but which has not been considered by the Council.
CHAPTER III.—THE STATE LEGISLATURE
General 
168. Constitution of Legislatures in States.—(1) For every State there 
shall be a Legislature which shall consist of the Governor, and—
(a) in the States of 2*** 3[Andhra Pradesh], Bihar, 4*** 5[Madhya
Pradesh], 6*** 7[Maharashtra], 8[Karnataka], 9*** 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 28 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) 
and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 23 
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. The words "Andhra Pradesh," omitted by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council 
(Abolition) Act, 1985 (34 of 1985), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-6-1985). 
3. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Legislative Council Act, 2005 (1 of 2006), s. 3
(w.e.f. 30-3-2007).
4. The word "Bombay" omitted by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960) 
s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
6. The words "Tamil Nadu," omitted by the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council (Abolition) 
Act, 1986 (40 of 1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-11-1986).
7. Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
8. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 4, for 
"Mysore" (w.e.f. 1-11-1973), which was inserted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 8(1) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
9. The word "Punjab," omitted by the Punjab Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969 
(46 of 1969), s. 4 (w.e.f. 7-1-1970).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
76
1[2[Tamil Nadu, Telangana]] 3[and Uttar Pradesh], two Houses;
(b) in other States, one House.
(2) Where there are two Houses of the Legislature of a State, one shall 
be known as the Legislative Council and the other as the Legislative Assembly, 
and where there is only one House, it shall be known as the Legislative 
Assembly.
169. Abolition or creation of Legislative Councils in States.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in article 168, Parliament may by law provide for the 
abolition of the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council or for the 
creation of such a Council in a State having no such Council, if the Legislative 
Assembly of the State passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the 
total membership of the Assembly and by a majority of not less than two-thirds 
of the members of the Assembly present and voting.
(2) Any law referred to in clause (1) shall contain such provisions for the 
amendment of this Constitution as may be necessary to give effect to the 
provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental and 
consequential provisions as Parliament may deem necessary.
(3) No such law as aforesaid shall be deemed to be an amendment of this 
Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
4[170. Composition of the Legislative Assemblies.—(1) Subject to the 
provisions of article 333, the Legislative Assembly of each State shall consist 
of not more than five hundred, and not less than sixty, members chosen by 
direct election from territorial constituencies in the State.
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), each State shall be divided into 
territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the population 
of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as
practicable, be the same throughout the State.
______________________________________________
2. The words "Tamil Nadu" ins. by the Tamil Nadu Legislative Council Act, 2010         
(16 of 2010), s. 3 (date to be notified).  
2. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (6 of 2014), s. 96, for "Tamil 
Nadu" (w.e.f. 1-6-2014).
3. Subs. by the West Bengal Legislative Council (Abolition) Act, 1969 (20 of 1969), s. 4
for "Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal" (w.e.f. 1-8-1969).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 9, for art, 170         
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).   

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
77
 
1[Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “population” means the 
population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the relevant 
figures have been published: 
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding 
census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the 
relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2[2026] have been 
published, be construed as a reference to the 3[2001] census.]
(3) Upon the completion of each census, the total number of seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of each State and the division of each State into territorial 
constituencies shall be readjusted by such authority and in such manner as 
Parliament may by law determine: 
Provided that such readjustment shall not affect representation in the 
Legislative Assembly until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly:
4[Provided further that such readjustment shall take effect from such date 
as the President may, by order, specify and until such readjustment takes effect, 
any election to the Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the 
territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment:
Provided also that until the relevant figures for the first census taken 
after the year 2[2026] have been published, it shall not be necessary to 
5[readjust—
(i) the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State 
as readjusted on the basis of the 1971 census; and 
(ii) the division of such State into territorial constituencies as may be 
readjusted on the basis of the 3[2001] census,
under this clause.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 29, for the 
Explanation (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for "2000" 
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4, for "1991" 
(w.e.f. 22-6-2003). The figures "1991" were substituted for the original figures "1971" 
by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5 (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 29 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 5, for certain 
words (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
78
171. Composition of the Legislative Councils.—(1) The total number 
of members in the Legislative Council of a State having such a Council shall 
not exceed 1[one-third] of the total number of members in the Legislative 
Assembly of that State:
Provided that the total number of members in the Legislative Council of 
a State shall in no case be less than forty. 
(2) Until Parliament by law otherwise provides, the composition of the 
Legislative Council of a State shall be as provided in clause (3).
(3) Of the total number of members of the Legislative Council of a 
State— 
(a) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by electorates 
consisting of members of municipalities, district boards and such other 
local authorities in the State as Parliament may by law specify;
(b) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates 
consisting of persons residing in the State who have been for at least 
three years graduates of any university in the territory of India or have 
been for at least three years in possession of qualifications prescribed by 
or under any law made by Parliament as equivalent to that of a graduate 
of any such university; 
(c) as nearly as may be, one-twelfth shall be elected by electorates 
consisting of persons who have been for at least three years engaged in 
teaching in such educational institutions within the State, not lower in 
standard than that of a secondary school, as may be prescribed by or 
under any law made by Parliament;
(d) as nearly as may be, one-third shall be elected by the members of 
the Legislative Assembly of the State from amongst persons who are not 
members of the Assembly;
(e) the remainder shall be nominated by the Governor in accordance 
with the provisions of clause (5).
(4) The members to be elected under sub-clauses (a), (b) and (c) of 
clause (3) shall be chosen in such territorial constituencies as may be prescribed 
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 10, for "one-fourth" 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
79
by or under any law made by Parliament, and the elections under the said 
sub-clauses and under sub-clause (d) of the said clause shall be held in 
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the 
single transferable vote.
(5) The members to be nominated by the Governor under sub-clause (e) 
of clause (3) shall consist of persons having special knowledge or practical 
experience in respect of such matters as the following, namely:—
Literature, science, art, co-operative movement and social service. 
172. Duration of State Legislatures.—(1) Every Legislative Assembly 
of every State, unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for 1[five years] from the 
date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and the expiration of the said 
period of 1[five years] shall operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:
Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of Emergency is 
in operation, be extended by Parliament by law for a period not exceeding one 
year at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after 
the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
(2) The Legislative Council of a State shall not be subject to dissolution, 
but as nearly as possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as 
may be on the expiration of every second year in accordance with the 
provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.
173. Qualification for membership of the State Legislature.—A 
person shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislature of a 
State unless he—
2[(a) is a citizen of India, and makes and subscribes before some 
person authorised in that behalf by the Election Commission an oath or 
affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Third 
Schedule;]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 30, for "five years" 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 24,  for "six years" (w.e.f. 6-9-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4, for cl. (a) 
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
80
(b) is, in the case of a seat in the Legislative Assembly, not less than 
twenty-five years of age and, in the case of a seat in the Legislative 
Council, not less than thirty years of age; and 
(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed in that 
behalf by or under any law made by Parliament.
1[174. 
Sessions 
of the State 
Legislature, 
prorogation 
and 
dissolution.—(1) The Governor shall from time to time summon the House or 
each House of the Legislature of the State to meet at such time and place as he 
thinks fit, but six months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one 
session and the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.
(2) The Governor may from time to time—
(a) prorogue the House or either House;
(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.]
175. Right of Governor to address and send messages to the House 
or Houses.—(1) The Governor may address the Legislative Assembly or, in 
the case of a State having a Legislative Council, either House of the Legislature 
of the State, or both Houses assembled together, and may for that purpose 
require the attendance of members.
(2) The Governor may send messages to the House or Houses of the 
Legislature of the State, whether with respect to a Bill then pending in the 
Legislature or otherwise, and a House to which any message is so sent shall 
with all convenient despatch consider any matter required by the message to be 
taken into consideration.
176. Special address by the Governor.—(1) At the commencement of 
2[the first session after each general election to the Legislative Assembly and at 
the commencement of the first session of each year], the Governor shall 
address the Legislative Assembly or, in the case of a State having a Legislative 
Council, both Houses assembled together and inform the Legislature of the 
causes of its summons.
(2) Provision shall be made by the rules regulating the procedure of the 
House or either House for the allotment of time for discussion of the matters 
referred to in such address 3***.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 8, for art.174              
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for "every session" (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
3. The words "and for the precedence of such discussion over other business of the 
House" omitted by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
81
177. Rights of Ministers and Advocate-General as respects the 
Houses.—Every Minister and the Advocate-General for a State shall have the 
right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the 
Legislative Assembly of the State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative 
Council, both Houses, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the 
proceedings of, any committee of the Legislature of which he may be named a 
member, but shall not, by virtue of this article, be entitled to vote. 
Officers of the State Legislature 
178. The Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly.—Every Legislative Assembly of a State shall, as soon as may be, 
choose two members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker 
becomes vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member to be Speaker or 
Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.
179. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of 
Speaker and Deputy Speaker.—A member holding office as Speaker or 
Deputy Speaker of an Assembly—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such 
member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and if such member is  
the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the 
Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members of the Assembly:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved 
unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the 
resolution:
Provided further that, whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker 
shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first meeting of the 
Assembly after the dissolution.
180. Power of the Deputy Speaker or other person to perform the 
duties of the office of, or to act as, Speaker.—(1) While the office of Speaker 
is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, 
if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly 
as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.
(2) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly 
the Deputy Speaker or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined 
by the rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, if no such person is present, such 
other person as may be determined by the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
82
181. The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker not to preside while a 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any 
sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the removal of the 
Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any 
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under 
consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, though he is present, preside, and 
the provisions of clause (2) of article 180 shall apply in relation to every such 
sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the 
case may be, the Deputy Speaker, is absent.
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take 
part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly while any resolution for 
his removal from office is under consideration in the Assembly and shall, 
notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first 
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but 
not in the case of an equality of votes.
182. The Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Legislative 
Council.—The Legislative Council of every State having such Council shall, as 
soon as may be, choose two members of the Council to be respectively 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof and, so often as the office of Chairman 
or Deputy Chairman becomes vacant, the Council shall choose another member 
to be Chairman or Deputy Chairman, as the case may be.
183. Vacation and resignation of, and removal from, the offices of 
Chairman and Deputy Chairman.—A member holding office as Chairman or 
Deputy Chairman of a Legislative Council—
(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Council;
(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such 
member is the Chairman, to the Deputy Chairman, and if such member is 
the Deputy Chairman, to the Chairman, resign his office; and
(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Council 
passed by a majority of all the then members of the Council:
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall be moved unless 
at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the intention to move the resolution.
184. Power of the Deputy Chairman or other person to perform the 
duties of the office of, or to act as, Chairman.—(1) While the office of 
Chairman is vacant, the duties of the office shall be performed by the Deputy 
Chairman or, if the office of Deputy Chairman is also vacant, by such member 
of the Council as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
83
(2) During the absence of the Chairman from any sitting of the Council 
the Deputy Chairman or, if he is also absent, such person as may be determined 
by the rules of procedure of the Council, or, if no such person is present, such 
other person as may be determined by the Council, shall act as Chairman.
185. The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman not to preside while a 
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration.—(1) At any 
sitting of the Legislative Council, while any resolution for the removal of the 
Chairman from his office is under consideration, the Chairman, or while any 
resolution for the removal of the Deputy Chairman from his office is under 
consideration, the Deputy Chairman, shall not, though he is present, preside, 
and the provisions of clause (2) of article 184 shall apply in relation to every 
such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Chairman or, as 
the case may be, the Deputy Chairman is absent.
(2) The Chairman shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take 
part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Council while any resolution for his 
removal from office is under consideration in the Council and shall, 
notwithstanding anything in article 189, be entitled to vote only in the first 
instance on such resolution or on any other matter during such proceedings but 
not in the case of an equality of votes.
186. Salaries and allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
and the Chairman and Deputy Chairman.—There shall be paid to the 
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and to the 
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council, such salaries 
and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislature of the State by 
law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances 
as are specified in the Second Schedule.
187. Secretariat of State Legislature.—(1) The House or each House 
of the Legislature of a State shall have a separate secretarial staff:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall, in the case of the Legislature 
of a State having a Legislative Council, be construed as preventing the creation 
of posts common to both Houses of such Legislature.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law regulate the recruitment, and 
the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the secretarial staff of the 
House or Houses of the Legislature of the State.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
84
(3) Until provision is made by the Legislature of the State under clause (2), 
the Governor may, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly 
or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be, make rules 
regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to the 
secretarial staff of the Assembly or the Council, and any rules so made shall have 
effect subject to the provisions of any law made under the said clause.
Conduct of Business
188. Oath or affirmation by members.—Every member of the 
Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council of a State shall, before taking 
his seat, make and subscribe before the Governor, or some person appointed in 
that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the 
purpose in the Third Schedule. 
189. Voting in Houses, power of Houses to act notwithstanding 
vacancies and quorum.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Constitution, 
all questions at any sitting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be 
determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting, other 
than the Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such.
The Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, shall not vote in the 
first instance, but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case of an 
equality of votes.
(2) A House of the Legislature of a State shall have power to act 
notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership thereof, and any proceedings 
in the Legislature of a State shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered 
subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do sat or voted or 
otherwise took part in the proceedings.
1[(3) Until the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, the 
quorum to constitute a meeting of a House of the Legislature of a State shall be 
ten members or one-tenth of the total number of members of the House, 
whichever is greater.
(4) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly or the 
Legislative Council of a State there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the 
Speaker or Chairman, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the House or 
to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.]
______________________________________________
1. Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 31 (date not 
notified). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
85
Disqualifications of Members
190. Vacation of seats.—(1) No person shall be a member of both 
Houses of the Legislature of a State and provision shall be made by the 
Legislature of the State by law for the vacation by a person who is chosen a 
member of both Houses of his seat in one house or the other.
(2) No person shall be a member of the Legislatures of two or more 
States specified in the First Schedule and if a person is chosen a member of the 
Legislatures of two or more such States, then, at the expiration of such period 
as may be specified in rules1 made by the President, that person's seat in the 
Legislatures of all such States shall become vacant, unless he has previously 
resigned his seat in the Legislatures of all but one of the States.
(3) If a member of a House of the Legislature of a State— 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in 
2[clause (1) or clause (2) of article 191]; or
3[(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the 
speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, and his resignation is 
accepted by the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be,]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant:
4[Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in sub-clause (b), 
if from information received or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he 
thinks fit, the Speaker or the Chairman, as the case may be, is satisfied that such 
resignation is not voluntary or genuine, he shall not accept such resignation.]
(4) If for a period of sixty days a member of a House of the Legislature 
of a State is without permission of the House absent from all meetings thereof, 
the House may declare his seat vacant:
Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days no account shall 
be taken of any period during which the House is prorogued or is adjourned for 
more than four consecutive days.
______________________________________________
1. See the Prohibition of Simultaneous Membership Rules, 1950 published by the 
Ministry of Law Notification number F. 46/50-C, dated the 26th January, 1950, 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, p. 678.
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 4, for "clause (1) of 
article 191" (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3 Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-third Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19-5-1974).
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 19-5-1974).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
86
191. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be 
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the Legislative 
Assembly or Legislative Council of a State—
1[(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or 
the Government of any State specified in the First Schedule, other than 
an office declared by the Legislature of the State by law not to disqualify 
its holder;]
(b) if he is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
court; 
(c) if he is an undischarged insolvent;
(d) if he is not a citizen of India, or has voluntarily acquired the 
citizenship of a foreign State, or is under any acknowledgment of 
allegiance or adherence to a foreign State;
(e) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. 
2[Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause], a person shall not be 
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or the 
Government of any State specified in the First Schedule by reason only that he 
is a Minister either for the Union or for such State.
3[(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the 
Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council of a State if he is so disqualified 
under the Tenth Schedule.]
4[192. Decision on questions as to disqualifications of members.—(1) 
If any question arises as to whether a member of a House of the Legislature of a 
State has become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1) 
of article 191, the question shall be referred for the decision of the Governor 
and his decision shall be final.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 32 to read as "(a) if 
he holds any such office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of 
any State specified in the First Schedule as is declared by Parliament by law to 
disqualify its holder" (date not notified). This amendment was omitted by the 
Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 5, for "(2) For the 
purposes of this article" (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
3. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 33, for art. 192
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 25, for art. 192 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
87
 (2) Before giving any decision on any such question, the Governor shall 
obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and shall act according to such 
opinion.]
193. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation 
under article 188 or when not qualified or when disqualified.—If a person 
sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative 
Council of a State before he has complied with the requirements of article 188, 
or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified for 
membership thereof, or that he is prohibited from so doing by the provisions of 
any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of the State, he shall be liable in 
respect of each day on which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred 
rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the State.
Powers, Privileges and Immunities of State Legislatures
and their Members
194. Powers, privileges, etc., of the Houses of Legislatures and of the 
members and committees thereof.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution and to the rules and standing orders regulating the procedure of the 
Legislature, there shall be freedom of speech in the Legislature of every State.
(2) No member of the Legislature of a State shall be liable to any 
proceedings in any court in respect of anything said or any vote given by him in 
the Legislature or any committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in 
respect of the publication by or under the authority of a House of such a 
Legislature of any report, paper, votes or proceedings.
1[(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House 
of the Legislature of a State, and of the members and the committees of a 
House of such Legislature, shall be such as may from time to time be defined 
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 34 to read as 
follows :
"(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of a House of the 
Legislature of  a State, and of the members and the committees of a House of such 
Legislature, shall be those of that House, and of its members and Committees, at the 
commencement of section 34 of the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 
1976, and as may be evolved by such House of the House of the People, and of its 
members and committees where such House is the Legislative Assembly and in 
accordance with those of the Council of States, and of its members and committees 
where such House is the Legislative Council." (date not notified). This amendment 
was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 45 
(w.e.f. 19-6-1979)."

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
88
by the Legislature by law, and, until so defined, 1[shall be those of that House 
and of its members and committees immediately before the coming into force 
of section 26 of the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978].
(4) The provisions of clauses (1), (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to 
persons who by virtue of this Constitution have the right to speak in, and 
otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, a House of the Legislature of a State 
or any committee thereof as they apply in relation to members of that Legislature. 
195. Salaries and allowances of members.—Members of the 
Legislative Assembly and the Legislative Council of a State shall be entitled to 
receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined, 
by the Legislature of the State by law and,  until provision in that respect is so 
made, salaries and allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as were 
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution applicable in the 
case of members of the Legislative Assembly of the corresponding Province.
Legislative Procedure 
196. Provisions as to introduction and passing of Bills.—(1) Subject 
to the provisions of articles 198 and 207 with respect to Money Bills and other 
financial Bills, a Bill may originate in either House of the Legislature of a State 
which has a Legislative Council.
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 197 and 198, a Bill shall not be 
deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a State having 
a Legislative Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either 
without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to by both 
Houses.
(3) A Bill pending in the Legislature of a State shall not lapse by reason 
of the prorogation of the House or Houses thereof.
(4) A Bill pending in the Legislative Council of a State which has not 
been passed by the Legislative Assembly shall not lapse on a dissolution of the 
Assembly.
(5) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly of a State, or 
which having been passed by the Legislative Assembly is pending in the 
Legislative Council, shall lapse on a dissolution of the Assembly.
197. Restriction on powers of Legislative Council as to Bills other 
than Money Bills.—(1) If after a Bill has been passed by the Legislative 
Assembly of a State having a Legislative Council and transmitted to the 
Legislative Council—
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 26, for certain 
words (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
89
(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or 
(b) more than three months elapse from the date on which the Bill is 
laid before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or
(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the 
Legislative Assembly does not agree;
the Legislative Assembly may, subject to the rules regulating its procedure, pass the 
Bill again in the same or in any subsequent session with or without such amendments, 
if any, as have been made, suggested or agreed to by the Legislative Council and then 
transmit the Bill as so passed to the Legislative Council.
 (2) If after a Bill has been so passed for the second time by the 
Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council—
(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
(b) more than one month elapses from the date on which the Bill is 
laid before the Council without the Bill being passed by it; or
(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to which the 
Legislative Assembly does not agree;
the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of the 
State in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the second 
time with such amendments, if any, as have been made or suggested by the Legislative 
Council and agreed to by the Legislative Assembly.
(3) Nothing in this article shall apply to a Money Bill.
198. Special procedure in respect of Money Bills.—(1) A Money Bill 
shall not be introduced in a Legislative Council.
(2) After a Money Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of a 
State having a Legislative Council, it shall be transmitted to the Legislative 
Council for its recommendations, and the Legislative Council shall within a 
period of fourteen days from the date of its receipt of the Bill return the Bill to the 
Legislative Assembly with its recommendations, and the Legislative Assembly 
may thereupon either accept or reject all or any of the recommendations of the 
Legislative Council.
(3) If the Legislative Assembly accepts any of the recommendations of 
the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed to have been passed 
by both Houses with the amendments recommended by the Legislative Council 
and accepted by the Legislative Assembly.
(4) If the Legislative Assembly does not accept any of the 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
90
recommendations of the Legislative Council, the Money Bill shall be deemed 
to have been passed by both Houses in the form in which it was passed by the 
Legislative Assembly without any of the amendments recommended by the 
Legislative Council. 
(5) If a Money Bill passed by the Legislative Assembly and transmitted 
to the Legislative Council for its recommendations is not returned to the 
Legislative Assembly within the said period of fourteen days, it shall be 
deemed to have been passed by both Houses at the expiration of the said period 
in the form in which it was passed by the Legislative Assembly. 
199. Definition of “Money Bills”.—(1) For the purposes of this 
Chapter, a Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions 
dealing with all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax;
(b) the regulation of the borrowing of money or the giving of any 
guarantee by the State, or the amendment of the law with respect to any 
financial obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the State;
(c) the custody of the Consolidated Fund or the Contingency Fund 
of the State, the payment of moneys into or the withdrawal of moneys 
from any such Fund;
(d) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of 
the State;
(e) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on 
the Consolidated Fund of the State, or the increasing of the amount of 
any such expenditure;
(f) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the 
State or the public account of the State or the custody or issue of such 
money; or
(g) any matter incidental to any of  the matters specified in 
sub-clauses  (a) to (f).
(2) A Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill by reason only that it 
provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the 
demand or payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by 
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or 
regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.
(3) If any question arises whether a Bill introduced in the Legislature of 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
91
a State which has a Legislative Council is a Money Bill or not, the decision of 
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of such State thereon shall be final.
(4) There shall be endorsed on every Money Bill when it is transmitted 
to the Legislative Council under article 198, and when it is presented to the 
Governor for assent under article 200, the certificate of the Speaker of the 
Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.
200. Assent to Bills.—When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative 
Assembly of a State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, has 
been passed by both Houses of the Legislature of the State, it shall be presented 
to the Governor and the Governor shall declare either that he assents to the Bill 
or that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the 
consideration of the President: 
Provided that the Governor may, as soon as possible after the 
presentation to him of the Bill for assent, return the Bill if it is not a Money Bill 
together with a message requesting that the House or Houses will reconsider 
the Bill or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider the 
desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his 
message and, when a Bill is so returned, the House or Houses shall reconsider 
the Bill accordingly, and if the Bill is passed again by the House or Houses 
with or without amendment and presented to the Governor for assent, the 
Governor shall not withhold assent therefrom:
Provided further that the Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve 
for the consideration of the President, any Bill which in the opinion of the 
Governor would, if it became law, so derogate from the powers of the High 
Court as to endanger the position which that Court is by this Constitution 
designed to fill.
201. Bills reserved for consideration.—When a Bill is reserved by a 
Governor for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare 
either that he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that, where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may 
direct the Governor to return the Bill to the House or, as the case may be, the 
Houses of the Legislature of the State together with such a message as is 
mentioned in the first proviso to article 200 and, when a Bill is so returned, the 
House or Houses shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months 
from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the House 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
92
or Houses with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the 
President for his consideration. 
Procedure in Financial Matters
202. Annual financial statement.—(1) The Governor shall in respect of 
every financial year cause to be laid before the House or Houses of the 
Legislature of the State a statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of 
the State for that year, in this Part referred to as the “annual financial 
statement”.
(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial 
statement shall show separately—
(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this 
Constitution as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the 
State; and 
(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made 
from the Consolidated Fund  of the State, 
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure. 
(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of each State—
(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Governor and other 
expenditure relating to his office;
(b) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy 
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, in the case of a State having a 
Legislative Council, also of the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of 
the Legislative Council;
(c) debt charges for which the State is liable including interest, 
sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure 
relating to the raising of loans and the service and redemption of debt;
(d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of Judges of 
any High Court;
(e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or award of any 
court or arbitral tribunal;
(f) any other expenditure declared by this Constitution, or by the 
Legislature of the State by law, to be so charged.
203. Procedure in Legislature with respect to estimates.—(1) So 
much of the estimates as relates to expenditure charged upon the Consolidated 
Fund of a State shall not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly, 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
93
but nothing in this clause shall be construed as preventing the discussion in the 
Legislature of any of those estimates.
(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be 
submitted in the form of demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and 
the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent, or to refuse to  assent, to 
any demand, or to assent to any demand subject to a reduction of the amount 
specified therein.
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation 
of the Governor. 
204. Appropriation Bills.—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under 
article 203 have been made by the Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to 
provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of all 
moneys required to meet—
(a) the grants so made by the Assembly; and 
(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State but 
not exceeding in any case the amount shown in the statement previously 
laid before the House or Houses.
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the House or 
either House of the Legislature of the State which will have the effect of 
varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of 
varying the amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of 
the State, and the decision of the person presiding as to whether an amendment 
is inadmissible under this clause shall be final.
(3) Subject to the provisions of articles 205 and 206, no money shall be 
withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the State except under appropriation 
made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of this article.
205. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.—(1) The Governor 
shall—
(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance with the 
provisions of article 204 to be expended for a particular service for the 
current financial year is found to be insufficient for the purposes of that 
year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for 
supplementary or additional expenditure upon some new service not 
contemplated in the annual financial statement for that year; or

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
94
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial 
year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that year,
cause to be laid before the House or the Houses of the Legislature of the State 
another statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to 
be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the State a demand for such excess, 
as the case may be.
(2) The provisions of articles 202, 203 and 204 shall have effect in 
relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to any law 
to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such 
demand as they have effect in relation to the annual financial statement and the 
expenditure mentioned therein or to a demand for a grant and the law to be 
made for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the State to meet such expenditure or grant.
206. Votes on account, votes of credit and exceptional grants.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, the 
Legislative Assembly of a State shall have power—
(a) to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated 
expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of 
the procedure prescribed in article 203 for the voting of such grant and 
the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of article 204 in 
relation to that expenditure;
(b) to make a grant for meeting an unexpected demand upon the 
resources of the State when on account of the magnitude or the indefinite 
character of the service the demand cannot be stated with the details 
ordinarily given in an annual financial statement;
(c) to make an exceptional grant which forms no part of the current 
service of any financial year,
and the Legislature of the State shall have power to authorise by law the 
withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated Fund of the State for the purposes 
for which the said grants are made.
(2) The provisions of articles 203 and 204 shall have effect in relation to 
the making of any grant under clause (1) and to any law to be made under that 
clause as they have effect in relation to the making of a grant with regard to any 
expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the law to be made 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
95
for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund 
of the State to meet such expenditure.
207. Special provisions as to financial Bills.—(1) A Bill or amendment 
making provision for any of the matters specified in sub-clauses (a) to (f) of 
clause (1) of article 199 shall not be introduced or moved except on the 
recommendation of the Governor, and a Bill making such provision shall not be 
introduced in a Legislative Council:
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this clause for 
the moving of an amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of 
any tax. 
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any 
of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the imposition of 
fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or payment of fees for 
licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the 
imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax by any local 
authority or body for local purposes.
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of a State shall not be passed by a 
House of the Legislature of the State unless the Governor has recommended to 
that House the consideration of the Bill.
Procedure Generally
208. Rules of procedure.—(1) A House of the Legislature of a State 
may make rules for regulating, subject to the provisions of this  Constitution, its 
procedure and the conduct of its business.
(2) Until rules are made under clause (1), the rules of procedure and 
standing orders in force immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution with respect to the Legislature for the corresponding Province shall 
have effect in relation to the Legislature of the State subject to such modifications 
and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly, or the Chairman of the Legislative Council, as the case may be.
(3) In a State having a Legislative Council the Governor, after 
consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and the Chairman of 
______________________________________________
The brackets and words "(including the quorum to constitute a meeting of the House)" 
ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 35 (date not notified). 
This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 
1978, s. 45 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
96
the Legislative Council, may make rules as to the procedure with respect to 
communications between the two Houses. 
209. Regulation by law of procedure in the Legislature of the State in 
relation to financial business.—The Legislature of a State may, for the purpose 
of the timely completion of financial business, regulate by law the procedure of, 
and the conduct of business in, the House or Houses of the Legislature of the 
State in relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of 
moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the State, and, if and so far as any 
provision of any law so made is inconsistent with any rule made by the House or 
either House of the Legislature of the State under clause (1) of article 208 or with 
any rule or standing order having effect in relation to the Legislature of the State 
under clause (2) of that article, such provision shall prevail. 
210. Language to be used in the Legislature.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything in Part XVII, but subject to the provisions of article 348, business in 
the Legislature of a State shall be transacted in the official language or 
languages of the State or in Hindi or in English:
Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or Chairman of 
the Legislative Council, or person acting as such, as the case may be, may 
permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of the 
languages aforesaid to address the House in his mother-tongue.
(2) Unless the Legislature of the State by law otherwise provides, this 
article shall, after the expiration of a period of fifteen years from the 
commencement of this Constitution, have effect as if the words “or in English” 
were omitted therefrom:
1[Provided that in relation to the 2[Legislatures of the States of Himachal 
Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura] this clause shall have effect as if for 
the words “fifteen years” occurring therein, the words “twenty-five years” were 
substituted:]
3[Provided further that in relation to the 4[Legislatures of the States of 
5[Arunachal Pradesh, Goa and Mizoram]], this clause shall have effect as if for 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 46 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971) s. 71, for 
"Legislature of the State of Himachal Pradesh" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3. Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
4. Subs. by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42, for "Legislature 
of the State of Mizoram" (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 63, for 
"Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
97
the words "fifteen years" occurring therein, the words "forty years" were 
substituted.]
211. Restriction on discussion in the Legislature.—No discussion 
shall take place in the Legislature of a State with respect to the conduct of any 
Judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court in the discharge of his duties.
212. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of the Legislature.—(1) 
The validity of any proceedings in the Legislature of a State shall not be called 
in question on the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure. 
(2) No officer or member of the Legislature of a State in whom powers 
are vested by or under this Constitution for regulating procedure or the conduct 
of business, or for maintaining order, in the Legislature shall be subject to the 
jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.
CHAPTER IV.—LEGISLATIVE POWER OF THE GOVERNOR
213. Power of Governor to promulgate Ordinances during recess of 
Legislature.—(1) If at any time, except when the Legislative Assembly of a 
State is in session, or where there is a Legislative Council in a State, except 
when both Houses of the Legislature are in session, the Governor is satisfied 
that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate 
action, he may promulgate  such Ordinances as the circumstances appear to 
him to require:
Provided that the Governor shall not, without instructions from the 
President, promulgate any such Ordinance if—
(a) a Bill containing the same provisions would under this 
Constitution have required the previous sanction of the President for the 
introduction thereof into the Legislature; or
(b) he would have deemed it necessary to reserve a Bill containing 
the same provisions for the consideration of the President; or
(c) an Act of the Legislature of the State containing the same 
provisions would under this Constitution have been invalid unless, 
having been reserved for the consideration of the President, it had 
received the assent of the President.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article shall have the same 
force and effect as an Act of the Legislature of the State assented to by the 
Governor, but every such Ordinance—

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
98
(a) shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State, or 
where there is a Legislative Council in the State, before both the Houses, 
and shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the 
reassembly of the Legislature, or if before the expiration of that period a 
resolution disapproving it is passed by the Legislative Assembly and 
agreed to by the Legislative Council, if any, upon the passing of the 
resolution or, as the case may be, on the resolution being agreed to by 
the Council; and 
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the Governor. 
Explanation.—Where the Houses of the Legislature of a State having a 
Legislative Council are summoned to reassemble on different dates, the period 
of six weeks shall be reckoned from the later of those dates for the purposes of 
this clause. 
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision 
which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the State 
assented to by the Governor, it shall be void: 
Provided that, for the purposes of the provisions of this Constitution 
relating to the effect of an Act of the Legislature of a State which is repugnant 
to an Act of Parliament or an existing law with respect to a matter enumerated 
in the Concurrent List, an Ordinance promulgated under this article in 
pursuance of instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of 
the Legislature of the State which has been reserved for the consideration of the 
President and assented to by him.
1(4)*    
*
*  
*  
______________________________________________
1. Cl. (4) was ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3 (with 
retrospective effect) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 27 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
99
CHAPTER V.—THE HIGH COURTS IN THE STATES
214. High Courts for States.—1*** There shall be a High Court for each 
State. 
2(2)*                          *                            *                            *  
2(3)*                          *                            *                            *  
215. High Courts to be courts of record.—Every High Court shall be a 
court of record and shall have all the powers of such a court including the 
power to punish for contempt of itself.
216. Constitution of High Courts.—Every High Court shall consist of a 
Chief Justice and such other Judges as the President may from time to time 
deem it necessary to appoint. 
3*    
*                       *                           *
* 
217. Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High 
Court.—(1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President 
by warrant under his hand and seal 4[on the recommendation of the National 
Judicial Appointments Commission referred to in article 124A], and the 
Governor of the State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the 
Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court, 5[shall hold office, in the 
case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in article 224, and in any 
other case, until he attains the age of 6[sixty-two years:]]
Provided that—
(a) a Judge may, by writing under his hand addressed to the 
President, resign his office;
(b) a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the 
______________________________________________
1. The bracket and figure "(1)" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Cls. (2) and (3) omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Proviso omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 11 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 6,  for "after 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the State, and, in the case 
of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High 
Court"  (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs. 
Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 12, for "shall hold office 
until he attains the age of sixty years" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth  Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4(a), for "sixty years" 
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
100
manner provided in clause (4) of article 124 for the removal of a Judge 
of the Supreme Court;
(c) the office of a Judge shall be vacated by his being appointed by 
the President to be a Judge of the Supreme Court or by his being 
transferred by the President to any other High Court within the territory 
of India. 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High 
Court unless he is a citizen of India and—
(a) has for at least ten years held a judicial office in the territory of 
India; or 
(b) has for at least ten years been an advocate of a High Court
1*** or of two or more such Courts in succession.2***
2(c)*            
*                       *         
*                        *
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause—
3[(a) in computing the period during which a person has held 
judicial office in the territory of India, there shall be included any period, 
after he has held any judicial office, during which the person has been an 
advocate of a High Court or has held the office of a member of a tribunal 
or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of 
law;]
4[(aa)] in computing the period during which a person has been an 
advocate of a High Court, there shall be included any period during 
which the person 5[has held judicial office or the office of a member of a 
tribunal or any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special 
knowledge of law] after he became an advocate;
(b) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial 
office in the territory of India or been an advocate of a High Court, there 
shall be included any period before the commencement of this 
______________________________________________
1. The words "in any State specified in the First Schedule" omitted by the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The word "or" and  sub-clause (c) were ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second 
Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 36 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and omitted by the Constitution 
(Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
4. Cl. (a) re-lettered as cl. (aa) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,
s. 28 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 36, for "has held 
judicial office" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
101
Constitution during which he has held judicial office in any area which 
was comprised before the fifteenth day of August, 1947, within India as 
defined by the Government of India Act, 1935, or has been an advocate 
of any High Court in any such area, as the case may be.
1[(3) If any question arises as to the age of a Judge of a High Court, the 
question shall be decided by the President after consultation with the Chief 
Justice of India and the decision of the President shall be final.]
218. Application of certain provisions relating to Supreme Court to 
High Courts.—The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of article 124 shall apply 
in relation to a High Court as they apply in relation to the Supreme Court with 
the substitution of references to the High Court for references to the Supreme 
Court.
219. Oath or affirmation by Judges of High Courts.—Every person 
appointed to be a Judge of a High Court 2*** shall, before he enters upon his 
office, make and subscribe before the Governor of the State, or some person 
appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form 
set out for the purpose in the Third Schedule.
3[220. Restriction on practice after being a permanent Judge.—No 
person who, after the commencement of this Constitution, has held office as a 
permanent Judge of a High Court shall plead or act in any court or before any 
authority in India except the Supreme Court and the other High Courts.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “High Court” does not 
include a High Court for a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule as it 
existed before the commencement4 of the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956.]
221. Salaries, etc., of Judges.—5[(1) There shall be paid to the Judges 
of each High Court such salaries as may be determined by Parliament by law 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth  Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 4(b), (with retrospective 
effect).
2. The words "in a State" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, 
s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. 1st November, 1956.
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 3, for clause (1) 
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
102
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries as are specified in 
the Second Schedule.] 
(2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances and to such rights in 
respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be 
determined by or under law made by Parliament and, until so determined, to 
such allowances and rights as are specified in the Second Schedule:
Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect 
to leave of absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage after his 
appointment.
222. Transfer of a Judge from one High Court to another.—(1) The 
President may, 1[on the recommendation of the National Judicial Appointments 
Commission referred to in article 124A], transfer a Judge from one High Court 
to any other High Court 2***.
3[(2) When a Judge has been or is so transferred, he shall, during the 
period he serves, after the commencement of the Constitution (Fifteenth 
Amendment) Act, 1963, as a Judge of the other High Court, be entitled to 
receive in addition to his salary such compensatory allowance as may be 
determined by Parliament by law and, until so determined, such compensatory 
allowance as the President may by order fix.]
223. Appointment of acting Chief Justice.—When the office of Chief 
Justice of a High Court is vacant or when any such Chief Justice is, by reason 
of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of 
the office shall be performed by such one of the other Judges of the Court as 
the President may appoint for the purpose.
4[224. Appointment of additional and acting Judges.—(1) If by 
reason of any temporary increase in the business of a High Court or by reason 
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 7,  for "after 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has 
been struck down by the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-
Record Association and Another Vs. Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015,
AIR 2016 SC 117.
2. The words "within the territory of India" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth  Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
Original cl. (2) was omitted  by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, 
s. 14 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 15 for art. 224        
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
103
of arrears of work therein, it appears to the President that the number of the 
Judges of that Court should be for the time being increased, 1[the President 
may, in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission, 
appoint] duly qualified persons to be additional Judges of the Court for such 
period not exceeding two years as he may specify. 
(2) When any Judge of a High Court other than the Chief Justice is by 
reason of absence or for any other reason unable to perform the duties of his 
office or is appointed to act temporarily as Chief Justice, 1[the President may, 
in consultation with the National Judicial Appointments Commission, appoint]
a duly qualified person to act as a Judge of that Court until the permanent Judge 
has resumed his duties.
 (3) No person appointed as an additional or acting Judge of a High 
Court shall hold office after attaining the age of 2[sixty-two years].] 
3[224A. Appointment of  retired Judges at sittings of  High Courts.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, 4[the National Judicial Appointments 
Commission on a reference made to it by the Chief Justice of a High Court for 
any State, may with the previous consent of the President], request any person 
who has held the office of a Judge of that Court or of any other High Court to 
sit and act as a Judge of the High Court for that State, and every such person so 
requested shall, while so sitting and acting, be entitled to such allowances as 
the President may by order determine and have all the jurisdiction, powers and 
privileges of, but shall not otherwise be deemed to be, a Judge of that High 
Court:
Provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to require any such 
person as aforesaid to sit and act as a Judge of that High Court unless he 
consents so to do.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 8,  for "the 
President may appoint" (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down, by 
the Supreme Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association 
and Another Vs. Union of India in its judgment, dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.
2 Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth  Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 6, for "sixty years" 
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, s. 9, for "the Chief 
Justice of a High Court for any State may at any time, with the previous consent of the 
President"  (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme 
Court in the case of Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association and Another Vs. 
Union of India in its judgment dated 16-10-2015, AIR 2016 SC 117.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
104
225. Jurisdiction of existing High Courts.—Subject to the provisions 
of this Constitution and to the provisions of any law of the appropriate 
Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred on that Legislature by this 
Constitution, the jurisdiction of, and the law administered in, any existing High 
Court, and the respective powers of the Judges thereof in relation to the 
administration of justice in the Court, including any power to make rules of 
Court and to regulate the sittings of the Court and of members thereof sitting 
alone or in Division Courts, shall be the same as immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution: 
1[Provided that any restriction to which the exercise of original 
jurisdiction by any of the High Courts with respect to any matter concerning 
the revenue or concerning any act ordered or done in the collection thereof was 
subject immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall no 
longer apply to the exercise of such jurisdiction.]
2[226. Power of High Courts to issue certain writs.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in article 32 3***, every High Court shall have 
power, throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction, to 
issue to any person or authority, including in appropriate cases, any 
Government, within those territories directions, orders or writs, including 
4[writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto 
and certiorari, or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights 
conferred by Part III and for any other purpose.]
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders or writs 
to any Government, authority or person may also be exercised by any High 
Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which the cause 
of action, wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of such power, 
______________________________________________
1. Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 37              
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and subsequently ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 29 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 38 for art. 226
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977). 
3. The words, figures and letters "but subject to the provisions of article 131A and article 
226A" omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 7 
(w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 30, for the portion 
beginning with "writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo 
warranto and certiorari, or any of them" and ending with "such illegality has resulted 
in substantial failure of justice." (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
105
notwithstanding that the seat of such Government or authority or the residence 
of such person is not within those territories.
1[(3) Where any party against whom an interim order, whether by way of 
injunction or stay or in any other manner, is made on, or in any proceedings 
relating to, a petition under clause (1), without—
(a) furnishing to such party copies of such petition and all documents 
in support of the plea for such interim order; and
(b) giving such party an opportunity of being heard,
makes an application to the High Court for the vacation of such order and 
furnishes a copy of such application to the party in whose favour such order has 
been made or the counsel of such party, the High Court shall dispose of the 
application within a period of two weeks from the date on which it is received or 
from the date on which the copy of such application is so furnished, whichever is 
later, or where the High Court is closed on the last day of that period, before the 
expiry of the next day afterwards on which the High Court is open; and if the 
application is not so disposed of, the interim order shall, on the expiry of that 
period, or, as the case may be, the expiry of the said next day, stand vacated.]
2[(4) The power conferred on a High Court by this article shall not be in 
derogation of the power conferred on the Supreme Court by clause (2) of article 32.]
3[226A. Constitutional validity of Central laws not to be considered in 
proceedings under article 226.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third 
Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 8 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
227. Power of superintendence over all courts by the High Court.—
4[(1) Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals 
throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s.30, for cls. (3), (4), 
(5) and (6) (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
2. Cl. (7) renumbered as cl. (4) by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, 
s. 30 (w.e.f. 1-8-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 39 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40, for cl. (1)
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 31, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
106
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the 
High Court may— 
(a) call for returns from such courts;
(b) make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating 
the practice and proceedings of such courts; and
(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept 
by the officers of any such courts.
(3) The High Court may also settle tables of fees to be allowed to the 
sheriff and all clerks and officers of such courts and to attorneys, advocates and 
pleaders practising therein:
Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or tables settled under 
clause (2) or clause (3) shall not be inconsistent with the provision of any law 
for the time being in force, and shall require the previous approval of the 
Governor. 
(4) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to confer on a High Court 
powers of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by or under 
any law relating to the Armed Forces.
1(5)*                            *                             *                             * 
228. Transfer of certain cases to High Court.—If the High Court is 
satisfied that a case pending in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial 
question of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution the determination of 
which is necessary for the disposal of the case, 2[it shall withdraw the case and
3*** may—]
(a) either dispose of the case itself, or
(b) determine the said question of law and return the case to the 
court from which the case has been so withdrawn together with a copy of 
its judgment on such question, and the said court shall on receipt thereof 
proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment.
______________________________________________
1. Cl. (5) was ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 40 
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 31 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 41, for "it shall 
withdraw the case and may—" (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
3. The words, figures and letter, "subject to the provisions of article 131A," omitted by 
the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 9 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
107
1[228A. Special provisions as to disposal of questions relating to 
constitutional validity of State laws.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-
third Amendment) Act, 1977, s. 10 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978). 
229. Officers and servants and the expenses of High Courts.—(1)  
Appointments of officers and servants of a High Court shall be made by the Chief 
Justice of the Court or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he may direct:
Provided that the Governor of the State 2*** may by rule require that in 
such cases as may be specified in the rule no person not already attached to the 
Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court save after 
consultation with the State Public Service Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of the 
State, the conditions of service of officers and servants of a High Court shall be 
such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of the Court or by 
some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the Chief Justice to 
make rules for the purpose:
Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they relate 
to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, require the approval of the Governor 
of the State 2***.
(3) The administrative expenses of a High Court, including all salaries, 
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and servants of 
the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State, and any 
fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund.
3[230. Extension of jurisdiction of High Courts to Union 
territories.—(1) Parliament may by law extend the jurisdiction of a High Court 
to, or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.
(2) Where the High Court of a State exercises jurisdiction in relation to a 
Union territory,—
(a) nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as empowering the 
Legislature of the State to increase, restrict or abolish that jurisdiction; and
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1-2-1977).
2. The words "in which the High Court has its principal seat" omitted by the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for arts. 230, 231 and 232 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
108
any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts in that territory, be 
construed as a reference to the President. 
231. Establishment of a common High Court for two or more 
States.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding provisions of 
this Chapter, Parliament may by law establish a common High Court for two or 
more States or for two or more States and a Union territory.
(2) In relation to any such High Court,— 
1(a)*
*
*
*
*
(b) the reference in article 227 to the Governor shall, in relation to 
any rules, forms or tables for subordinate courts, be construed as a 
reference to the Governor of the State in which the subordinate courts 
are situate; and
(c) the references in articles 219 and 229 to the State shall be 
construed as a reference to the State in which the High Court has its 
principal seat:
Provided that if such principal seat is in a Union territory, the references 
in articles 219 and 229 to the Governor, Public Service Commission, 
Legislature and Consolidated Fund of the State shall be construed respectively 
as references to the President, Union Public Service Commission, Parliament 
and Consolidated Fund of India.]
[232. Interpretation.—Articles 230, 231 and 232 subs. by articles 230 
and 231 by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 16 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956)].
CHAPTER VI.—SUBORDINATE  COURTS
233.  Appointment of district judges.—(1) Appointments of persons to 
______________________________________________
1. Sub-clause (a) was omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-ninth Amendment) Act, 2014, 
s. 10 (w.e.f. 13-4-2015). This amendment has been struck down by the Supreme Court
vide its order the 16-10-2015 in the Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record Association 
and Another Vs. Union of India reported AIR 2016 SC 117. Before amendment,
sub-clause (a) was as under:—
"(a) the reference in article 217 to the Governor of the State shall be construed as 
reference to the Governors of all the States in relation to which the High Court 
exercises jurisdiction".

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
109
be, and the posting and promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made 
by the Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court exercising 
jurisdiction in relation to such State.
(2) A person not already in the service of the Union or of the State shall 
only be eligible to be appointed a district judge if he has been for not less than 
seven years an advocate or a pleader and is recommended by the High Court 
for appointment. 
1[233A. Validation  of  appointments  of,  and  judgments,  etc.,  
delivered  by,  certain district  judges.—Notwithstanding any judgment, 
decree or order of any court,—
(a) (i) no appointment of any person already in the judicial service 
of a State or of any person who has been for not less than seven years an 
advocate or a pleader, to be a district judge in that State, and
(ii) no posting, promotion or transfer of any such person as a 
district judge, made at any time before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, otherwise than in 
accordance with the provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be 
deemed to be illegal or void or ever to have become illegal or void by 
reason only of the fact that such appointment, posting, promotion or 
transfer was not made in accordance with the said provisions;
(b) no jurisdiction exercised, no judgment, decree, sentence or order 
passed or made, and no other act or proceeding done or taken, before the 
commencement of the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966 
by, or before, any person appointed, posted, promoted or transferred as a 
district judge in any State otherwise than in accordance with the 
provisions of article 233 or article 235 shall be deemed to be illegal or 
invalid or ever to have become illegal or invalid by reason only of the 
fact that such appointment, posting, promotion or transfer was not made 
in accordance with the said provisions.]
234. Recruitment of persons other than district judges to the judicial 
service.—Appointments of persons other than district judges to the judicial service 
of a State shall be made by the Governor of the State in accordance with rules made 
by him in that behalf after consultation with the State Public Service Commission 
and with the High Court exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twentieth Amendment) Act, 1966, s. 2 (w.e.f. 22-12-1966).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VI.—The States) 
110
235. Control over subordinate courts.—The control over district 
courts and courts subordinate thereto including the posting and promotion of, 
and the grant of leave to, persons belonging to the judicial service of a State 
and holding any post inferior to the post of district judge shall be vested in the 
High Court, but nothing in this article shall be construed as taking away from 
any such person any right of appeal which he may have under the law 
regulating the conditions of his service or as authorising the High Court to deal 
with him otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of his service 
prescribed under such law. 
236. Interpretation.—In this Chapter—
(a) the expression “district judge” includes judge of a city civil court, 
additional district judge, joint district judge, assistant district judge, chief 
judge of a small cause court, chief presidency magistrate, additional 
chief presidency magistrate, sessions judge, additional sessions judge 
and assistant sessions Judge;
(b) the expression “judicial service” means a service consisting 
exclusively of persons intended to fill the post of district judge and other 
civil judicial posts inferior to the post of district judge.
237. Application  of the provisions of  this Chapter to certain class or 
classes of magistrates.—The Governor may by public notification direct that 
the foregoing provisions of this Chapter and any rules made thereunder shall 
with effect from such date as may be fixed by him in that behalf apply in 
relation to any class or classes of magistrates in the State as they apply in 
relation to persons appointed to the judicial service of the State subject to such 
exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the notification.

111
PART VII
[The States in Part B of the First Schedule].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________
Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and 
Sch. (w.e.f.  1-11-1956)

112
PART VIII 
1[THE UNION TERRITORIES] 
2[239. Administration of Union territories.—(1) Save as otherwise 
provided by Parliament by law, every Union territory shall be administered by 
the President acting, to such extent as he thinks fit, through an administrator to 
be appointed by him with such designation as he may specify. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Part VI, the President may
appoint the Governor of a State as the administrator of an adjoining Union 
territory, and where a Governor is so appointed, he shall exercise his functions 
as such administrator independently of his Council of Ministers.] 
3*[239A. Creation of local Legislatures or Council of Ministers or 
both for certain Union territories.—(1) Parliament may by law create 4[for 
the Union territory of 5[Puducherry]]— 
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to
function as a Legislature for the Union territory, or 
(b) a Council of Ministers,
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be 
specified in the law. 
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall not be deemed to be
an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368 
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect 
of amending this Constitution.] 
______________________________________________ 
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 17, for  the heading
"THE STATES IN PART C OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for art. 239 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 4 (w.e.f. 28-12-1962). 
4. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987) s. 63, for
"for any of the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu and Pondicherry"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987). 
5. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of  Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006). 
* Article 239A has been made applicable to Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir by
the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019) S.13 
(w.e.f. 31-10-2019)

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories) 
113
1[239AA. Special provisions with respect to Delhi.—(1) As from the 
date of commencement of the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 
1991, the Union territory of Delhi shall be called the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi (hereafter in this Part referred to as the National Capital Territory) and 
the administrator thereof appointed under article 239 shall be designated as the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
(2)(a) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for the National Capital 
Territory and the seats in such Assembly shall be filled by members chosen by 
direct election from territorial constituencies in the National Capital Territory. 
(b) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly, the number of 
seats reserved for Scheduled Castes, the division of the National Capital 
Territory into territorial constituencies (including the basis for such division) 
and all other matters relating to the functioning of the Legislative Assembly 
shall be regulated by law made by Parliament.
2[(ba) Seats shall be reserved for women in the Legislative Assembly of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
(bb) As nearly as may be, one-third of the seats reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi shall be reserved for women.
(bc) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats to be 
filled by direct election in the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi (including the numbers of seats reserved for women 
belonging to the Scheduled Castes) shall be reserved for women in such 
manner as Parliament may by law determine.] 
(c) The provisions of articles 324 to 327 and 329 shall apply in relation 
to the National Capital Territory, the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory and the members thereof as they apply, in relation to a State, 
the Legislative Assembly of a State and the members thereof respectively; and 
any reference in articles 326 and 329 to “appropriate Legislature” shall be 
deemed to be a reference to Parliament.
______________________________________________
1. Arts 239AA and 239 AB ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1991,
s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-2-1992).
2. ins. by the Constitution (One-hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, s. 2 (date yet 
to be notified).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories) 
114
(3) (a) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislative 
Assembly shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part of the 
National Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters enumerated in the 
State List or in the Concurrent List in so far as any such matter is applicable to 
Union territories except matters with respect to Entries 1, 2 and 18 of the State 
List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as they relate to the said 
Entries 1, 2 and 18.
(b) Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall derogate from the powers of 
Parliament under this Constitution to make laws with respect to any matter for 
a Union territory or any part thereof.
(c) If any provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly with 
respect to any matter is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament 
with respect to that matter, whether passed before or after the law made by the 
Legislative Assembly, or of an earlier law, other than a law made by the 
Legislative Assembly, then, in either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as 
the case may be, such earlier law, shall prevail and the law made by the 
Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void:
Provided that if any such law made by the Legislative Assembly has 
been reserved for the consideration of the President and has received his assent, 
such law shall prevail in the National Capital Territory: 
Provided further that nothing in this sub-clause shall prevent Parliament 
from enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a 
law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the 
Legislative Assembly.
(4) There shall be a Council of Ministers consisting of not more than ten 
percent. of the total number of members in the Legislative Assembly, with the 
Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the Lieutenant Governor in the 
exercise of his functions in relation to matters with respect to which the 
Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, except in so far as he is, by or 
under any law, required to act in his discretion:
Provided that in the case of difference of opinion between the Lieutenant 
Governor and his Ministers on any matter, the Lieutenant Governor shall refer 
it to the President for decision and act according to the decision given thereon 
by the President and pending such decision it shall be competent for the 
Lieutenant Governor in any case where the matter, in his opinion, is so urgent 
that it is necessary for him to take immediate action, to take such action or to 
give such direction in the matter as he deems necessary.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories) 
115
(5) The Chief Minister shall be appointed by the President and other 
Ministers shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief 
Minister and the Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the 
President. 
(6) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
1[(7) (a)] Parliament may, by law, make provisions for giving effect to, 
or supplementing the provisions contained in the foregoing clauses and for all 
matters incidental or consequential thereto.
2[(b) Any such law as is referred to in sub-clause (a) shall not be deemed 
to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368 
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect 
of amending, this Constitution.]
 (8) The  provisions of article 239B shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to the National Capital Territory, the Lieutenant Governor and the 
Legislative Assembly, as they apply in relation to the Union territory of 
3[Puducherry], the administrator and its Legislature, respectively; and any 
reference in that article to “clause (1) of article 239A” shall be deemed to be a 
reference to this article or article 239AB, as the case may be.
239AB. Provision in case of failure of constitutional machinery.—If  
the President, on receipt of a report from the Lieutenant Governor or otherwise, 
is satisfied—
(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration of the 
National Capital Territory cannot be carried on in accordance with the 
provisions of article 239AA or of any law made in pursuance of that 
article; or
(b) that for the proper administration of the National Capital 
Territory it is necessary or expedient so to do,
the President may by order suspend the operation of any provision of article 
239AA or of all or any of the provisions of any law made in pursuance of that
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventieth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3, for "(7)" 
(w.e.f. 21-12-1991).
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 21-12-1991).
3. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of  Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for 
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories) 
116
article for such period and subject to such conditions as may be specified in 
such law and make such incidental and consequential provisions as may appear 
to him to be necessary or expedient for administering the National Capital 
Territory in accordance with the provisions of article 239 and article 239AA.] 
1[239B. Power of administrator to promulgate Ordinances during 
recess of Legislature.—(1) If at any time, except when the Legislature of 2[the 
Union territory of 3[Puducherry]] is in session, the administrator thereof is 
satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take 
immediate action, he may promulgate such Ordinances as the circumstances 
appear to him to require:
Provided that no such Ordinance shall be promulgated by the 
administrator except after obtaining instructions from the President in that 
behalf:
Provided further that whenever the said Legislature is dissolved, or its 
functioning remains suspended on account of any action taken under any such 
law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the administrator shall not 
promulgate any Ordinance during the period of such dissolution or suspension.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated under this article in pursuance of 
instructions from the President shall be deemed to be an Act of the Legislature 
of the Union  territory which has been duly enacted after complying with the 
provisions in that behalf contained in any such law as is referred to in clause (1) 
of article 239A, but every such Ordinance—
(a) shall be laid before the Legislature of the Union territory and 
shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly 
of the Legislature or if, before the expiration of that period, a resolution 
disapproving it is passed by the Legislature, upon the passing of the 
resolution; and
(b) may be withdrawn at any time by the administrator after 
obtaining instructions from the President in that behalf.
(3) If and so far as an Ordinance under this article makes any provision 
which would not be valid if enacted in an Act of the Legislature of the Union
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-12-1971).
2. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987) s. 63, for "a Union 
territory referred to in clause (1) article 239A" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
3. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for 
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories) 
117
territory made after complying with the provisions in that behalf contained in 
any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, it shall be void.]
1(4)* 
                       *                             *                              * 
2[240.  Power of President to make regulations for certain Union 
territories.—(1) The President may make regulations for the peace, progress 
and good government of the Union territory of— 
 (a) the Andaman and Nicobar Islands; 
3[(b) Lakshadweep;]
4[(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu;]
5[(d)  **** ;] 
6[(e) 7[Puducherry ];] 
8(f) * * * 
9(g) * * *
10[Provided that when any body is created under article 239A to function 
as a Legislature for the Union territory of 7[Puducherry], the President shall not 
make any regulation for the peace, progress and good government of that 
Union territory with effect from the date appointed for the first meeting of the 
Legislature:]
______________________________________________
1. Clause (4) ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4 (with 
retrospective effect). This amendment was omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth 
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 32 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 17, for art. 240 (w.e.f. 1-11-
1956).
3. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 
(34 of 1973), s. 4, for entry (b) (w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
4. Subs. by the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (Merger of Union territories) Act, 
2019 (44 of 2019) s. 4(i) (w.e.f. 26-1-2020) for entry (c) which was ins. by the Constitution 
(Tenth Amendment) Act, 1961, s.3 (w.e.f. 11-8-1961).
5. Omitted by the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (Merger of Union territories) 
Act, 2019 (44 of 2019) s. 4(ii) (w.e.f. 26-1-2020).
6. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 5 (w.e.f. 16-8-1962).
7. Subs. by the Pondicherry  (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4 for 
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
8. The entry (f) relating to Mizoram omitted by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 
(34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
9. The entry (g) relating to Arunachal Pradesh omitted by the State of Arunachal Pradesh 
Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 42 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
10. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 5 (w.e.f. 28-12-1962).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part VIII.—The Union Territories) 
118
1[Provided further that whenever the body functioning as a Legislature 
for the Union territory of 2[Puducherry] is dissolved, or the functioning of that 
body as such Legislature remains suspended on account of any action taken 
under any such law as is referred to in clause (1) of article 239A, the President 
may, during the period of such dissolution or suspension, make regulations for 
the peace, progress and good government of that Union territory.]
(2) Any regulation so made may repeal or amend any Act made by 
Parliament or 3[any other law], which is for the time being applicable to the 
Union territory and, when promulgated by the President, shall have the same 
force and effect as an Act of Parliament which applies to that territory.]
241. High Courts for Union territories.—(1) Parliament may by law 
constitute a High Court for a 4[Union territory] or declare any court in any 
5[such territory] to be a High Court for all or any of the purposes of this 
Constitution. 
(2) The provisions of Chapter V of Part VI shall apply in relation to 
every High Court referred to in clause (1) as they apply in relation to a High 
Court referred to in article 214 subject to such modifications or exceptions as 
Parliament may by law provide. 
6[(3) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and to the provisions 
of any law of the appropriate Legislature made by virtue of powers conferred 
on that Legislature by or under this Constitution, every High Court exercising 
jurisdiction immediately before the commencement of the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, in relation to any Union territory shall 
continue to exercise such jurisdiction in relation to that territory after such 
commencement.
(4) Nothing in this article derogates from the power of Parliament to 
extend or exclude the jurisdiction of a High Court for a State to, or from, any 
Union territory or part thereof.]
242. [Coorg.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-2-1972).
2. Subs. by the Pondicherry  (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 4, for 
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4, for "any existing 
law" (w.e.f. 15-2-1972).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for  "State 
specified in Part C of  the First Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
5. Subs. by s. 29. and Sch., ibid., for "such State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
6. Subs. by s. 29, and Sch., ibid., for  cls. (3) and (4) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

119
1[PART IX
THE PANCHAYATS
243. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “district” means a district in a State;
(b) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting of persons registered in 
the electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of 
Panchayat at the village level;
(c) “intermediate level” means a level between the village and 
district levels specified by the Governor of a State by public notification 
to be the intermediate level for the purposes of this Part; 
(d) “Panchayat” means an institution (by whatever name called) of 
self-government constituted under article 243B, for the rural areas;
(e) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of a Panchayat;
(f) “Population” means the population as ascertained at the last 
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published;
(g) “village” means a village specified by the Governor by public 
notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part and includes a 
group of villages so specified.
243A. Gram Sabha.—A Gram Sabha may exercise such powers and 
perform such functions at the village level as the Legislature of a State may, by 
law, provide.
243B. Constitution of Panchayats.—(1) There shall be constituted in 
every State, Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels in 
accordance with the provisions of this Part. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), Panchayats at the intermediate
level may not be constituted in a State having a population not exceeding 
twenty lakhs.
243C. Composition of Panchayats.—(1) Subject to the provisions of 
this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect 
to the composition of Panchayats:
______________________________________________
1. Original Part IX  relating to "The territories in Part D of the First Schedule and other 
territories not specified in that Schedule" was omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956) and subsequently ins. by the 
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
120
Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial area of a 
Panchayat at any level and the number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled 
by election shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
(2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by 
direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area and, for this 
purpose, each Panchayat area shall be divided into territorial constituencies in 
such manner that the ratio between the population of each constituency and the 
number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout 
the Panchayat area. 
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the 
representation—
(a) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the village level, in the 
Panchayats at the intermediate level or, in the case of a State not having 
Panchayats at the intermediate level, in the Panchayats at the district 
level;
(b) of the Chairpersons of the Panchayats at the intermediate level, in 
the Panchayats at the district level;
(c) of the members of the House of the People and the members of 
the Legislative Assembly of the State representing constituencies which 
comprise wholly or partly a Panchayat area at a level other than the 
village level, in such Panchayat;
(d) of the members of the Council of States and the members of the 
Legislative Council of the State, where they are registered as electors 
within—
(i) a Panchayat area at the intermediate level, in Panchayat at the 
intermediate level;
(ii) a Panchayat area at the district level, in Panchayat at the 
district level.
(4) The Chairperson of a Panchayat and other members of a Panchayat 
whether or not chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the 
Panchayat area shall have the right to vote in the meetings of the Panchayats.
(5) The Chairperson of—
(a) a Panchayat at the village level shall be elected in such manner as 
the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide; and
(b) a Panchayat at the intermediate level or district level shall be 
elected by, and from amongst, the elected members thereof.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
121
243D. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for—
(a) the Scheduled Castes; and 
(b) the Scheduled Tribes,
in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as 
may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct 
election in that Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in that 
Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the 
total population of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to 
different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under 
clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as 
the case may be,  the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for 
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the 
total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Panchayat shall be 
reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Panchayat.
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or 
any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled 
Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, 
provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in 
any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total 
number of such offices in the Panchayats at each level as the population of the 
Scheduled Castes in the State or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to 
the total population of the State:
Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number of offices 
of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women:
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall 
be allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of 
offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for women) under clause (4) 
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from making 
any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or offices of Chairpersons in 
the Panchayats at any level in favour of backward class of citizens.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
122
243E. Duration of Panchayats, etc.—(1) Every Panchayat, unless 
sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for 
five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer.
 (2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the 
effect of causing dissolution of a Panchayat at any level, which is functioning 
immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its duration specified 
in clause (1).
(3) An election to constitute a Panchayat shall be completed—
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its 
dissolution:
 Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved 
Panchayat would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be 
necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the Panchayat 
for such period.
(4) A Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Panchayat before 
the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period 
for which the dissolved Panchayat would have continued under clause (1) had it 
not been so dissolved.
243F. Disqualifications for membership.— (1) A person shall be 
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a Panchayat—
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in 
force for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State 
concerned:
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is 
less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of twenty-
one years;
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the 
Legislature of the State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Panchayat has 
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the 
question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner 
as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
123
243G. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats.—
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by 
law, endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be 
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government and 
such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and 
responsibilities upon Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such 
conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to—
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;
 (b) the implementation of schemes for economic development and 
social justice as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to 
the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
243H. Powers to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Panchayats.—
The Legislature of a State may, by law,—
 (a) authorise a Panchayat to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, 
duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to 
such limits;
(b) assign to a Panchayat such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and 
collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject to such 
conditions and limits;
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the 
Consolidated Fund of the State; and
 (d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys 
received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Panchayats and also for the 
withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,
as may be specified in the law.
243I. Constitution of Finance Commission to review financial 
position.—(1) The Governor of a State shall, as soon as may be within one 
year from the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) 
Act, 1992, and thereafter at the expiration of every fifth year, constitute a 
Finance Commission to review the financial position of the Panchayats and to 
make recommendations to the Governor as to—
(a) the principles which should govern—
(i) the distribution between the State and the Panchayats of the 
net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the 
State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the 
allocation between the Panchayats at all levels of their respective 
shares of such proceeds;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
124
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which 
may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Panchayats; 
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Panchayats from the Consolidated 
Fund of the State;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the 
Panchayats;
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the 
Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Panchayats. 
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the composition 
of the Commission, the qualifications which shall be requisite for appointment 
as members thereof and the manner in which they shall be selected.
(3) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such 
powers in the performance of their functions as the Legislature of the State 
may, by law, confer on them.
(4) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the 
Commission under this article together with an explanatory memorandum as to 
the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
243J. Audit of accounts of Panchayats.—The Legislature of a State 
may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by 
the Panchayats and the auditing of such accounts.
243K. Elections to the Panchayats.—(1) The superintendence, 
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct 
of, all elections to the Panchayats shall be vested in a State Election 
Commission consisting of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by 
the Governor.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of a 
State, the conditions of service and tenure of office of the State Election 
Commissioner shall be such as the Governor may by rule determine:
Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed 
from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of a 
High Court and the conditions of service of the State Election Commissioner 
shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
125
(3) The Governor of a State shall, when so requested by the State 
Election Commission, make available to the State Election Commission such 
staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred on the 
State Election Commission by clause (1). 
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a 
State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in 
connection with, elections to the Panchayats.
243L. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part 
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union 
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were 
references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under article 
239 and references to the Legislature or the legislative Assembly of a State 
were references, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, 
to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the 
provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject 
to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification.
243M.  Part not to apply to certain areas.—(1) Nothing in this Part 
shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas 
referred to in clause (2), of article 244.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall apply to—
(a)  the States of Nagaland, Meghalaya and Mizoram;
(b) the hill areas in the State of Manipur for which District Councils 
exist under any law for the time being in force.
(3) Nothing in this Part—
(a) relating to Panchayats at the district level shall apply to the hill 
areas of the District of Darjeeling in the State of West Bengal for which 
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council exists under any law for the time being 
in force;
(b) shall be construed to affect the functions and powers of the 
Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under such law.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IX.—The Panchayats)
126
1[(3A) Nothing in article 243D, relating to reservation of seats for the 
Scheduled Castes, shall apply to the State of Arunachal Pradesh.]
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a)  the Legislature of a State referred to in sub-clause (a) of 
clause (2) may, by law, extend this Part to that State, except the areas, if 
any, referred to in clause (1), if the Legislative Assembly of that State 
passes a resolution to that effect by a majority of the total membership of 
that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members 
of that House present and voting; 
(b) Parliament may, by law, extend the provisions of this Part to the 
Scheduled Areas and the tribal areas referred to in clause (1) subject to 
such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in such law, and 
no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for 
the purposes of article 368.
243N. 
Continuance 
of 
existing 
laws 
and 
Panchayats.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to 
Panchayats in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or 
repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the 
expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier:
Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before such 
commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner 
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of 
that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House 
of the Legislature of that State.
243O.  Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of 
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or 
purporting to be made under article 243K, shall not be called in question 
in any court;
(b) no election to any Panchayat shall be called in question except by 
an election petition presented to such authority and in such manner as is 
provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature of a State.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-9-2000).

 
127
1[PART IXA
THE MUNICIPALITIES
243P. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise 
requires,—
(a) “Committee” means a Committee constituted under article 243S;
(b) “district” means a district in a State;
(c) “Metropolitan area” means an area having a population of ten 
lakhs or more, comprised in one or more districts and consisting of two 
or more Municipalities or Panchayats or other contiguous areas, 
specified by the Governor by public notification to be a Metropolitan 
area for the purposes of this Part;
(d) “Municipal area” means the territorial area of a Municipality as is 
notified by the Governor;
(e) “Municipality” means an institution of self-government 
constituted under article 243Q;
(f) “Panchayat” means a Panchayat constituted under article 243B;
(g) “population” means the population as ascertained at the last 
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published.
243Q. Constitution of Municipalities.—(1) There shall be constituted 
in every State,—
(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called) for a transitional 
area, that is to say, an area in transition  from a rural area to an urban 
area;
(b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area,
in accordance with the provisions of this Part:
______________________________________________
1. Part IXA ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 1-6-1993).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
128
Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be constituted in 
such urban area or part thereof as the Governor may, having regard to the size 
of the area and the municipal services being provided or proposed to be 
provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as he 
may deem fit, by public notification, specify to be an industrial township.
(2) In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area” or “a 
larger urban area” means such area as the Governor may, having regard to the 
population of the area, the density of the population therein, the revenue 
generated for local administration, the percentage of employment in non-
agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he may 
deem fit, specify by public notification for the purposes of this Part.
243R. Composition of Municipalities.—(1) Save as provided in    
clause (2), all the seats in a Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by 
direct election from the territorial constituencies in the Municipal area and for 
this purpose each Municipal area shall be divided into territorial constituencies 
to be known as wards.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide—
(a) for the representation in a Municipality of—
(i) persons having special knowledge or experience in 
Municipal administration;
(ii) the members of the House of the People and the members 
of the Legislative Assembly of the State representing 
constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the Municipal 
area;
(iii) the members of the Council of States and the members of 
the Legislative Council of the State registered as electors within 
the Municipal area;
(iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted under 
clause (5) of article 243S:
Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i) shall not 
have the right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality;
(b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a Municipality.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
129
243S.  Constitution and composition of Wards Committees, etc.—(1) 
There shall be constituted Wards Committees, consisting of one or more wards, 
within the territorial area of a Municipality having a population of three lakhs 
or more.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect 
to—
(a) the composition and the territorial area of a Wards Committee;
(b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards Committee shall be 
filled. 
(3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward within the territorial 
area of the Wards Committee shall be a member of that Committee.
(4) Where a Wards Committee consists of—
(a) one ward, the member representing that ward in the Municipality; 
or 
(b) two or more wards, one of the members representing such wards 
in the Municipality elected by the members of the Wards Committee,
shall be the Chairperson of that Committee.
(5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the Legislature of a 
State from making any provision for the constitution of Committees in addition 
to the Wards Committees.
243T. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in every Municipality and the 
number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same 
proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that 
Municipality as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the Municipal area or 
of the Scheduled Tribes in the Municipal area bears to the total population of 
that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies 
in a Municipality.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved under 
clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as 
the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes. 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
130
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved for 
women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the 
total number of seats to be filled by direct election in every Municipality shall 
be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Municipality.
(4) The offices of Chairpersons in the Municipalities shall be reserved 
for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as 
the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide. 
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the reservation of 
offices of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for women) under clause (4) 
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from 
making any provision for reservation of seats in any Municipality or offices of 
Chairpersons in the Municipalities in favour of backward class of citizens.
243U. Duration of Municipalities, etc.—(1) Every Municipality, unless 
sooner dissolved under any law for the time being in force, shall continue for 
five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer:
Provided that a Municipality shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard before its dissolution.
(2) No amendment of any law for the time being in force shall have the 
effect of causing dissolution of a Municipality at any level, which is 
functioning immediately before such amendment, till the expiration of its 
duration specified in clause (1).
(3) An election to constitute a Municipality shall be completed,—
(a) before the expiry of its duration specified in clause (1);
(b) before the expiration of a period of six months from the date of its 
dissolution:
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved 
Municipality would have continued is less than six months, it shall not be 
necessary to hold any election under this clause for constituting the 
Municipality for such period.
(4) A Municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a Municipality 
before the expiration of its duration shall continue only for the remainder of the 
period for which the dissolved Municipality would have continued under 
clause (1) had it not been so dissolved.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
131
243V. Disqualifications for membership.—(1) A person shall be 
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of a Municipality— 
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force 
for the purposes of elections to the Legislature of the State concerned: 
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is 
less than twenty-five years of age, if he has attained the age of 
twenty-one years;
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by the 
Legislature of the State.
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Municipality has 
become subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in clause (1), the 
question shall be referred for the decision of such authority and in such manner 
as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide. 
243W. Powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities, 
etc.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State 
may, by law, endow—
(a) the Municipalities with such powers and authority as may be 
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self-government 
and such law may contain provisions for the devolution of powers and  
responsibilities upon Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may 
be specified therein, with respect to—
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development and social 
justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of 
schemes as may be entrusted to them including those in relation to 
the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as may be 
necessary to enable them to carry out the responsibilities conferred upon 
them including those in relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth 
Schedule.
243X. Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.—
The Legislature of a State may, by law,—
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such 
taxes, duties, tolls and fees in accordance with such procedure and 
subject to such limits;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
132
(b) assign to a Municipality such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied 
and collected by the State Government for such purposes and subject to 
such conditions and limits;
(c) provide for making such grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from 
the Consolidated Fund of the State; and 
(d) provide for constitution of such Funds for crediting all moneys 
received, respectively, by or on behalf of the Municipalities and also for 
the withdrawal of such moneys therefrom,
as may be specified in the law. 
243Y. Finance Commission.—(1) The Finance Commission constituted 
under article 243I shall also review the financial position of the Municipalities 
and make recommendations to the Governor as to—
(a) the principles which should govern—
(i) the distribution between the State and the Municipalities of 
the net proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the 
State, which may be divided between them under this Part and the 
allocation between the Municipalities at all levels of their respective 
shares of such proceeds;
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which 
may be assigned to, or appropriated by, the Municipalities;
(iii) the grants-in-aid to the Municipalities from the 
Consolidated Fund of the State;
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the 
Municipalities;
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the 
Governor in the interests of sound finance of the Municipalities.
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the 
Commission under this article together with an explanatory memorandum as to 
the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
243Z. Audit of accounts of Municipalities.—The Legislature of a State 
may, by law, make provisions with respect to the maintenance of accounts by 
the Municipalities and the auditing of such accounts.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
133
243ZA. Elections to the Municipalities.—(1) The superintendence, 
direction and control of the preparation of electoral rolls for, and the conduct 
of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the State Election 
Commission referred to in article 243K.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a 
State may, by law, make provision with respect to all matters relating to, or in 
connection with, elections to the Municipalities. 
243ZB. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part 
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union 
territory, have effect as if the references to the Governor of a State were 
references to the Administrator of the Union territory appointed under 
article 239 and references to the Legislature or the Legislative Assembly of a 
State were references in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative 
Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by public notification, direct that the 
provisions of this Part shall apply to any Union territory or part thereof subject 
to such exceptions and modifications as he may specify in the notification.
243ZC. Part not to apply to certain areas.—(1) Nothing in this Part 
shall apply to the Scheduled Areas referred to in clause (1), and the tribal areas 
referred to in clause (2) of article 244.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall be construed to affect the functions and 
powers of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council constituted under any law for the 
time being in force for the hill areas of the district of Darjeeling in the State of 
West Bengal. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may, by 
law, extend the provisions of this Part to the Scheduled Areas and the tribal 
areas referred to in clause (1) subject to such exceptions and modifications as 
may be specified in such law, and no such law shall be deemed to be an 
amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368.
243ZD. Committee for district planning.—(1) There shall be 
constituted in every State at the district level a District Planning Committee to 
consolidate the plans prepared by the Panchayats and the Municipalities in the 
district and to prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect 
to—

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
134
(a) the composition of the District Planning Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be 
filled:
Provided that not less than four-fifths of the total number of 
members of such Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the 
elected members of the Panchayat at the district level and of the 
Municipalities in the district in proportion to the ratio between the 
population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district;
(c) the functions relating to district planning which may be 
assigned to such Committees; 
(d)  the manner in which the Chairpersons of such  Committees 
shall be chosen.
(3) Every District Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft 
development plan,—
 (a)  have regard to—
(i) matters of common interest between the Panchayats and 
the Municipalities including spatial planning, sharing of water and 
other physical and natural resources, the integrated development 
of infrastructure and environmental conservation;
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether 
financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor  
may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every District Planning Committee shall forward 
the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the Government 
of the State.
243ZE. Committee for Metropolitan planning.—(1) There shall be 
constituted in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan Planning Committee to 
prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provision with respect to—
(a) the composition of the Metropolitan Planning Committees;
(b) the manner in which the seats in such Committees shall be filled:

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
135
Provided that not less than two-thirds of the members of such 
Committee shall be elected by, and from amongst, the elected members 
of the Municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats in the 
Metropolitan area in proportion to the ratio between the population of 
the Municipalities and of the Panchayats in that area;
(c) the representation in such Committees of the Government of 
India and the Government of the State and of such organisations and 
institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the functions 
assigned to such Committees; 
(d) the functions relating to planning and coordination for the 
Metropolitan area which may be assigned to such Committees;
(e) the manner in which the Chairpersons of such Committees 
shall be chosen. 
(3) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in preparing the draft 
development plan,— 
(a) have regard to—
(i) the plans prepared by the Municipalities and the 
Panchayats in the Metropolitan area;
(ii) matters of common interest between the Municipalities 
and the Panchayats, including coordinated  spatial planning of the 
area, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, 
the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental 
conservation;
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the 
Government of India and the Government of the State;
(iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made 
in the Metropolitan area by agencies of the Government of India 
and of the Government of the State and other available resources 
whether financial or otherwise;
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor 
may, by order, specify.
(4) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall 
forward the development plan, as recommended by such Committee, to the 
Government of the State.  

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXA.—The Municipalities)
136
243ZF. Continuance of existing laws and Municipalities.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Part, any provision of any law relating to 
Municipalities in force in a State immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or 
repealed by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the 
expiration of one year from such commencement, whichever is earlier:
Provided that all the Municipalities existing immediately before such 
commencement shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner 
dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of 
that State or, in the case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House 
of the Legislature of that State.
243ZG. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—
Notwithstanding anything in this  Constitution,—
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of 
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or 
purporting to be made under article 243ZA shall not be called in 
question in any court;
(b) no election to any Municipality shall be called in question 
except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such 
manner as is provided for by or under any law made by the Legislature 
of a State.]
 

137
1[PART IXB 
THE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES
243ZH. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “authorised person” means a person referred to as such in article 
243ZQ; 
(b) “board” means the board of directors or the governing body of a 
co-operative society, by whatever name called, to which the direction 
and control of the management of the affairs of a society is entrusted to;
(c) “co-operative society” means a society registered or deemed to be 
registered under any law relating to co-operative societies for the time 
being in force in any State;
(d) “multi-State co-operative society” means a society with objects 
not confined to one State and registered or deemed to be registered under 
any law for the time being in force relating to such co-operatives;
(e) “office bearer” means a President, Vice-President, Chairperson, 
Vice-Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer, of a co-operative society and 
includes any other person to be elected by the board of any co-operative 
society;
(f) “Registrar” means the Central Registrar appointed by the Central 
Government in relation to the multi-State co-operative societies and the 
Registrar for co-operative societies appointed by the State  Government 
under the law made by the Legislature of a State in relation to 
co-operative societies;
(g) “State Act” means any law made by the Legislature of a State; 
(h) “State level co-operative society” means a co-operative society 
having its area of operation extending to the whole of a State and defined 
as such in any law made by the Legislature of a State.
243ZI. Incorporation of co-operative societies.—Subject to the 
provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions 
with respect to the incorporation, regulation and winding up of co-operative 
societies based on the principles of voluntary formation, democratic 
member-control, member-economic participation and autonomous functioning.
______________________________________________
1. Part IXB ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-seventh Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 4 
(w.e.f. 15-2-2012).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
138
243ZJ. Number and term of members of board and its office 
bearers.—(1) The board shall consist of such number of directors as may be 
provided by the Legislature of a State, by law:
Provided that the maximum number of directors of a co-operative 
society shall not exceed twenty-one:  
Provided further that the Legislature of a State shall, by law, provide for 
the reservation of one seat for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes 
and two seats for women on board of every co-operative society consisting of 
individuals as members and having members from such class of category of 
persons. 
(2) The term of office of elected members of the board and its office 
bearers shall be five years from the date of election and the term of office 
bearers shall be conterminous with the term of the board: 
Provided that the board may fill a casual vacancy on the board by 
nomination out of the same class of members in respect of which the casual 
vacancy has arisen, if the term of office of the board is less than half of its 
original term.
(3) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, make provisions for 
co-option of persons to be members of the board having experience in the field 
of banking, management, finance or specialisation in any other field relating to 
the objects and activities undertaken by the co-operative society, as members of 
the board of such society: 
Provided that the number of such co-opted members shall not exceed 
two in addition to twenty-one directors specified in the first proviso to 
clause (1): 
Provided further that such co-opted members shall not have the right to 
vote in any election of the co-operative society in their capacity as such 
member or to be eligible to be elected as office bearers of the board:
Provided also that the functional directors of a co-operative society shall 
also be the members of the board and such members shall be excluded for the 
purpose of counting the total number of directors specified in the first proviso 
to clause (1). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
139
243ZK. Election of members of board.—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law made by the Legislature of a State, the election of a board 
shall be conducted before the expiry of the term of the board so as to ensure 
that the newly elected members of the board assume office immediately on the 
expiry of the office of members of the outgoing board.
(2) The superintendence, direction and control of the preparation of 
electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to a co-operative society 
shall vest in such an authority or body, as may be provided by the Legislature 
of a State, by law:
Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for the 
procedure and guidelines for the conduct of such elections.
243ZL. Supersession and suspension of board and interim 
management.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the 
time being in force, no board shall be superseded or kept under suspension for a 
period exceeding six months: 
Provided that the board may be superseded or kept under suspension in a 
case—
(i) of its persistent default; or
(ii) of negligence in the performance of its duties; or
(iii) the board has committed any act prejudicial to the interests of 
the co-operative society or its members; or
(iv) there is stalemate in the constitution or functions of the board; 
or  
(v)  the authority or body as provided by the Legislature of a State, 
by law, under clause (2) of article 243ZK, has failed to conduct 
elections in accordance with the provisions of the State Act:
Provided further that the board of any such co-operative society shall not 
be superseded or kept under suspension where there is no Government 
shareholding or loan or financial assistance or any guarantee by the 
Government: 
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society carrying on the 
business of banking, the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
(10 of 1949) shall also apply: 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
140
Provided also that in case of a co-operative society, other than a 
multi-State co-operative society, carrying on the business of banking, the 
provisions of this clause shall have the effect as if for the words “six months”, 
the words  “one year” had been substituted.
(2) In case of supersession of a board, the administrator appointed to 
manage the affairs of such co-operative society shall arrange for conduct of 
elections within the period specified in clause (1) and handover the 
management to the elected board.
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions for the 
conditions of service of the administrator.
243ZM. Audit of accounts of co-operative societies.—(1) The 
Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the 
maintenance of accounts by the co-operative societies and the auditing of such 
accounts at least once in each financial year. 
(2) The Legislature of a State shall, by law, lay down the minimum 
qualifications and experience of auditors and auditing firms that shall be 
eligible for auditing accounts of the co-operative societies.
(3) Every co-operative society shall cause to be audited by an auditor or 
auditing firms referred to in clause (2) appointed by the general body of the 
co-operative society: 
Provided that such auditors or auditing firms shall be appointed from a 
panel approved by a State Government or an authority authorised by the State 
Government in this behalf.
(4) The accounts of every co-operative society shall be audited within 
six months of the close of the financial year to which such accounts relate.
(5) The audit report of the accounts of an apex co-operative society, as 
may be defined by the State Act, shall be laid before the State Legislature in the 
manner, as may be provided by the State Legislature, by law.
243ZN. Convening of general body meetings.—The Legislature of a 
State may, by law, make provisions that the annual general body meeting of 
every co-operative society shall be convened within a period of six months of 
close of the financial year to transact the business as may be provided in such 
law.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
141
243ZO. Right of a member to get information.—(1) The Legislature 
of a State may, by law, provide for access to every member of a co-operative 
society to the books, information and accounts of the co-operative society kept 
in regular transaction of its business with such member.
(2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions to ensure 
the participation of members in the management of the co-operative society 
providing minimum requirement of attending meetings by the members and 
utilising the minimum level of services as may be provided in such law.
(3) The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide for co-operative 
education and training for its members.
243ZP. Returns.—Every co-operative society shall file returns, within 
six months of the close of every financial year, to the authority designated by 
the State Government including the following matters, namely:—
(a) annual report of its activities;
(b) its audited statement of accounts; 
(c) plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body of the 
co-operative society; 
(d) list of amendments to the bye-laws of the co-operative society, if 
any;
(e) declaration regarding date of holding of its general body meeting 
and conduct of elections when due; and
(f) any other information required by the Registrar in pursuance of 
any of the provisions of the State  Act.
243ZQ. Offences and penalties.—(1) The Legislature of a State may, 
by law, make provisions for the offences relating to the co-operative societies 
and penalties for such offences.
(2) A law made by the Legislature of a State under clause (1) shall 
include the commission of the following act or omission as offences, namely:—
(a) a co-operative society or an officer or member thereof wilfully 
makes a false return or furnishes false information, or any person 
wilfully not furnishes any information required from him by a person 
authorised in this behalf under the provisions of the State Act;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part IXB.—Co-operative Societies)
142
(b) any person wilfully or without any reasonable excuse disobeys 
any summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under the 
provisions of the State Act; 
(c) any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a 
co-operative society amount deducted by him from its employee within a 
period of fourteen days from the date on which such deduction is made; 
(d) any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to handover custody of 
books, accounts, documents, records, cash, security and other property 
belonging to a co-operative society of which he is an officer or 
custodian, to an authorised person; and
(e) whoever, before, during or after the election of members of the 
board or office bearers, adopts any corrupt practice.
243ZR. Application to multi-State co-operative societies.—The 
provisions of this Part shall apply to the multi-State co-operative societies 
subject to the modification that any reference to “Legislature of a State”, “State 
Act” or “State Government” shall be construed as a reference to “Parliament”, 
“Central Act” or “the Central Government” respectively.
243ZS. Application to Union territories.—The provisions of this Part 
shall apply to the Union territories and shall, in their application to a Union 
territory, having no Legislative Assembly as if the references to the Legislature 
of a State were a reference to the administrator thereof appointed under 
article 239 and, in relation to a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly, 
to that Legislative Assembly:
Provided that the President may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the provisions of this Part shall not apply to any Union territory or
part thereof as he may specify in the notification.
243ZT. Continuance of existing laws.— Notwithstanding anything in 
this Part, any provision of any law relating to co-operative societies in force in 
a State immediately before the commencement of the Constitution 
(Ninety-seventh  Amendment) Act, 2011, which is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Part, shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed 
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority or until the expiration 
of one year from such commencement, whichever is less.]

 
143
PART X
THE SCHEDULED AND TRIBAL AREAS
244. Administration of Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas.—(1) The 
provisions of the Fifth Schedule shall apply to the administration and control of 
the Scheduled Areas and Scheduled Tribes in any State 1*** other  than 2[the 
States of Assam, 3[, 4[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram]]].
(2) The provisions of the Sixth Schedule shall apply to the 
administration of the tribal areas in 2[the States of Assam, 3[, 5[Meghalaya, 
Tripura and Mizoram]]].
6[244A. Formation of an autonomous State comprising certain tribal 
areas in Assam and creation of local Legislature or Council of Ministers or 
both therefor.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament 
may, by law, form within the State of Assam an autonomous State comprising 
(whether wholly or in part) all or any of the tribal areas specified in 7[Part I] of 
the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and create therefor— 
(a) a body, whether elected or partly nominated and partly 
elected, to function as a Legislature for the autonomous State, or
(b) a Council of Ministers,
or both with such constitution, powers and functions, in each case, as may be 
specified in the law.
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) may, in particular,—
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for 
"the State of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for "and 
Meghalaya" (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
 
4. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for "Meghalaya and 
Tripura" (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for "Meghalaya and Tripura and the Union territory of Mizoram".
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
6. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-9-1969). 
7. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for 
"Part A" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part X.—The Scheduled and Tribal Areas)
144
(a) specify the matters enumerated in the State List or the 
Concurrent List with respect to which the Legislature of the autonomous 
State shall have power to make laws for the whole or any part thereof, 
whether to the exclusion of the Legislature of the State of Assam or 
otherwise;
(b) define the matters with respect to which the executive power 
of the autonomous State shall extend;
(c) provide that any tax levied by the State of Assam shall be 
assigned to the autonomous State in so far as the proceeds thereof are 
attributable to the autonomous State; 
 (d) provide that any reference to a State in any article of this 
Constitution shall be construed as including a reference to the 
autonomous State; and
(e) make such supplemental, incidental and consequential 
provisions as may be deemed necessary.
(3) An amendment of any such law as aforesaid in so far as such 
amendment relates to any of the matters specified in sub-clause (a) or 
sub-clause (b) of clause (2) shall have no effect unless the amendment is passed 
in each House of Parliament by not less than two-thirds of the members present 
and voting.
(4) Any such law as is referred to in this article shall not be deemed to 
be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of article 368 
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has the effect 
of amending this Constitution.]

 
145
PART XI
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE UNION AND THE STATES 
CHAPTER I.—LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
Distribution of Legislative Powers
245. Extent of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of 
States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may 
make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the 
Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the State. 
(2) No law made by Parliament shall be deemed to be invalid on the 
ground that it would have extra-territorial operation.
246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the 
Legislatures of States.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), 
Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as 
the “Union List”).
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament, and, subject to 
clause (1), the Legislature of any State 1*** also, have power to make laws 
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh 
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the “Concurrent List”).
(3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any State 1*** has 
exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to 
any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this 
Constitution referred to as the “State List”). 
(4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to any matter for 
any part of the territory of India not included 2[in a State] notwithstanding that 
such matter is a matter enumerated in the State List.
3[246A. Special provision with respect to goods and services tax.—(1)  
Notwithstanding anything contained in articles 246 and 254, Parliament, and, 
subject to clause (2), the Legislature of every State, have power to make laws 
with respect to goods and services tax imposed by the Union or by such State. 
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of  the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "in Part A or Part B of  the First Schedule"
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 2
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States) 
146
(2) Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect to goods 
and services tax where the supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place 
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
Explanation.—The provisions of this article, shall, in respect of goods 
and services tax referred to in clause (5) of article 279A, take effect from the 
date recommended by the Goods and Services Tax Council.]  
247. Power of Parliament to provide for the establishment of certain 
additional courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament may 
by law provide for the establishment of any additional courts for the better 
administration of laws made by Parliament or of any existing laws with respect 
to a matter enumerated in the Union List.
248. Residuary powers of legislation.—(1) 1[Subject to article 246A, 
Parliament] has exclusive power to make any law with respect to any matter 
not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List. 
(2) Such power shall include the power of making any law imposing a 
tax not mentioned in either of those Lists.
249. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the 
State List in the national interest.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, if the Council of States has declared by 
resolution supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and 
voting that it is necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament 
should make laws with respect to 2[goods and services tax provided under article 
246A or] any matter enumerated in the State List specified in the resolution, it 
shall be lawful for Parliament to make laws for the whole or any part of the 
territory of India with respect to that matter while the resolution remains in force.
(2) A resolution passed under clause (1) shall remain in force for such 
period not exceeding one year as may be specified therein: 
Provided that, if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance 
in force of any such resolution is passed in the manner provided in clause (1), 
such resolution shall continue in force for a further period of one year from the 
date on which under this clause it would otherwise have ceased to be in force.
(3) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the 
passing of a resolution under clause (1) have been competent to make shall, to the 
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of 
six months after the resolution has ceased to be in force, except as respects things 
done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 3, for 
"Parliament" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States) 
147
250. Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to any matter in 
the State List if a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Chapter, Parliament shall, while a 
Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, have power to make laws for the 
whole or any part of the territory of India with respect to 1[goods and services 
tax provided under article 246A or] any of the matters enumerated in the State 
List. 
(2) A law made by Parliament which Parliament would not but for the 
issue of a Proclamation of Emergency have been competent to make shall, to the 
extent of the incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of 
six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, except as respects things 
done or omitted to be done before the expiration of the said period.
251. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament under articles 
249 and 250 and laws made by the Legislatures of States.—Nothing in 
articles 249 and 250 shall restrict the power of the Legislature of a State to 
make any law which under this Constitution it has power to make, but if any 
provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is repugnant to any 
provision of a law made by Parliament which Parliament has under either of the 
said articles power to make, the law made by Parliament, whether passed 
before or after the law made by the Legislature of the State, shall prevail, and 
the law made by the Legislature of the State shall to the extent of the 
repugnancy, but so long only as the law made by Parliament continues to have 
effect, be inoperative.
252. Power of Parliament to legislate for two or more States by 
consent and adoption of such legislation by any other State.—(1) If it 
appears to the Legislatures of two or more States to be desirable that any of the 
matters with respect to which Parliament has no power to make laws for the 
States except as provided in articles 249 and 250 should be regulated in such 
States by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are passed by all 
the Houses of the Legislatures of those States, it shall be lawful for Parliament 
to pass an act for regulating that matter accordingly, and any Act so passed 
shall apply to such States and to any other State by which it is adopted 
afterwards by resolution passed in that behalf by the House or, where there are 
two Houses, by each of the Houses of the Legislature of that State.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 5
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States) 
148
(2) Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amended or repealed by an 
Act of Parliament passed or adopted in like manner but shall not, as respects 
any State to which it applies, be amended or repealed by an Act of the 
Legislature of that State.
253. Legislation for giving effect to international agreements.—
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, 
Parliament has power to make any law for the whole or any part of the territory 
of India for implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with any other 
country or countries or any decision made at any international conference, 
association or other body.
254. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws made 
by the Legislatures of States.—(1) If any provision of a law made by the 
Legislature of a State is repugnant to any provision of a law made by 
Parliament which Parliament is competent to enact, or to any provision of an 
existing law with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent 
List, then, subject to the provisions of clause (2), the law made by Parliament, 
whether passed before or after the law made by the Legislature of such State, 
or, as the case may be, the existing law, shall prevail and the law made by the 
Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.
(2) Where a law made by the Legislature of a State 1*** with respect to 
one of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List contains any provision 
repugnant to the provisions of an earlier law made by Parliament or an existing 
law with respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of such 
State shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has 
received his assent, prevail in that State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent Parliament from 
enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law 
adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature 
of the State.
255. Requirements as to recommendations and previous sanctions to 
be regarded as matters of procedure only.—No Act of Parliament or of the 
Legislature of a State 1***, and no provision in any such Act, shall be invalid 
by reason only that some recommendation or previous sanction required by this 
Constitution was not given, if assent to that Act was given—
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of  the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States) 
149
(a) where the recommendation required was that of the Governor, 
either by the Governor or by the President;
(b) where the recommendation required was that of the 
Rajpramukh, either by the Rajpramukh or by the President; 
(c) where the recommendation or previous sanction required was 
that of the President, by the President.
CHAPTER II.—ADMINISTRATIVE RELATIONS
General 
256. Obligation of States and the Union.—The executive power of every 
State shall be so exercised as to ensure compliance with the laws made by 
Parliament and any existing laws which apply in that State, and the executive 
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as may 
appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose:
257. Control of the Union over States in certain cases.—(1) The 
executive power of every State shall be so exercised as not to impede or 
prejudice the exercise of the executive power of the Union, and the executive 
power of the Union shall extend to the giving of such directions to a State as 
may appear to the Government of India to be necessary for that purpose.
(2) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of 
directions to a State as to the construction and maintenance of means of 
communication declared in the direction to be of national or military 
importance:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be taken as restricting the 
power of Parliament to declare highways or waterways to be national highways 
or national waterways or the power of the Union with respect to the highways 
or waterways so declared or the power of the Union to construct and maintain 
means of communication as part of its functions with respect to naval, military 
and air force works.
(3) The executive power of the Union shall also extend to the giving of 
directions to a State as to the measures to be taken for the protection of the 
railways within the State.
(4) Where in carrying out any direction given to a State under clause (2) 
as to the construction or maintenance of any means of communication or under 
clause (3) as to the measures to be taken for the protection of any railway, costs 
have been incurred in excess of those which would have been incurred in the 
discharge of the normal duties of the State if such direction had not been given, 
there shall be paid by the Government of India to the State such sum as may be 
agreed, or, in default of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator 
appointed by the Chief Justice of India, in respect of the extra costs so incurred 
by the State.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States) 
150
1[257A. [Assistance to States by deployment of armed forces or other 
forces of the Union.].—Omitted
by the Constitution (Forty-fourth 
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).]
258. Power of the Union to confer powers, etc., on States in certain 
cases.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, 
with the consent of the Government of a State, entrust either conditionally or 
unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any 
matter to which the executive power of the Union extends.
(2) A law made by Parliament which applies in any State may, 
notwithstanding that it relates to a matter with respect to which the Legislature 
of the State has no power to make laws, confer powers and impose duties, or 
authorise the conferring of powers and the imposition of duties, upon the State 
or officers and authorities thereof.
(3) Where by virtue of this article powers and duties have been conferred 
or imposed upon a State or officers or authorities thereof, there shall be paid by 
the Government of India to the State such sum as may be agreed, or, in default 
of agreement, as may be determined by an arbitrator appointed by the Chief 
Justice of India, in respect of any extra costs of administration incurred by the 
State in connection with the exercise of those powers and duties.
2[258A. Power of the States to entrust functions to the Union.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Governor of a State may, 
with the consent of the Government of India, entrust either conditionally or 
unconditionally to that Government or to its officers functions in relation to any 
matter to which the executive power of the State extends.]
[259. Armed Forces in States in Part B of the First Schedule.].—
Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
260. Jurisdiction of the Union in relation to territories outside 
India.—The Government of India may by agreement with the Government of 
any territory not being part of the territory of India undertake any executive, 
legislative or judicial functions vested in the Government of such territory, but 
every such agreement shall be subject to, and governed by, any law relating to 
the exercise of foreign jurisdiction for the time being in force.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 43 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 18 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XI.—Relations between the Union and the States) 
151
261. Public acts, records and judicial proceedings.—(1) Full faith and 
credit shall be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and 
judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State.
(2) The manner in which and the conditions under which the acts, 
records and proceedings referred to in clause (1) shall be proved and the effect 
thereof determined shall be as provided by law made by Parliament.
(3) Final judgments or orders delivered or passed by civil courts in any 
part of the territory of India shall be capable of execution anywhere within that 
territory according to law. 
Disputes relating to Waters
262. Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-State rivers 
or river valleys.—(1) Parliament may by law provide for the adjudication of 
any dispute or complaint with respect to the use, distribution or control of the 
waters of, or in, any inter-State river or river valley. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament may by 
law provide that neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall exercise 
jurisdiction in respect of any such dispute or complaint as is referred to in 
clause (1).
Co-ordination between States
263. Provisions with respect to an inter-State Council.—If at any time 
it appears to the President that the public interests would be served by the 
establishment of a Council charged with the duty of— 
(a) inquiring into and advising upon disputes which may have 
arisen between States;
(b) investigating and discussing subjects in which some or all of 
the States, or the Union and one or more of  the States, have a common 
interest; or 
(c) making recommendations upon any such subject and, in 
particular, recommendations for the better co-ordination of policy and 
action with respect to that subject, 
it shall be lawful for the President by order to establish such a Council, and to 
define the nature of the duties to be performed by it and its organisation and 
procedure.

 
152
PART XII
FINANCE, PROPERTY, CONTRACTS AND SUITS
CHAPTER I.—FINANCE
General 
1[264. Interpretation.—In this Part, “Finance Commission” means a 
Finance Commission constituted under article 280.] 
265. Taxes not to be imposed save by authority of law.—No tax shall 
be levied or collected except by authority of law.
266. Consolidated Funds and public accounts of India and of the 
States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of article 267 and to the provisions of 
this Chapter with respect to the assignment of the whole or part of the net 
proceeds of certain taxes and duties to States, all revenues received by the 
Government of India, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of 
treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by 
that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be 
entitled  “the Consolidated Fund of India”, and all revenues received by the 
Government of a State, all loans raised by that Government by the issue of 
treasury bills, loans or ways and means advances and all moneys received by 
that Government in repayment of loans shall form one consolidated fund to be 
entitled “the Consolidated Fund of the State”.
(2) All other public moneys received by or on behalf of the Government 
of India or the Government of a State shall be credited to the public account of 
India or the public account of the State, as the case may be. 
(3) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the 
Consolidated Fund of a State shall be appropriated except in accordance with 
law and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Constitution.
267. Contingency Fund.—(1) Parliament may by law establish a 
Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency 
Fund of India”  into which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be 
determined by such law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the 
President to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the 
purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such 
expenditure by Parliament by law under article 115 or article 116.
______________________________________________
1 Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for art. 264
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
153
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law establish a Contingency Fund in 
the nature of an imprest to be entitled “the Contingency Fund of the State” into 
which shall be paid from time to time such sums as may be determined by such 
law, and the said Fund shall be placed at the disposal of the Governor 1*** of the 
State to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund for the purposes of 
meeting unforeseen expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the 
Legislature of the State by law under article 205 or article 206.  
Distribution of Revenues between the Union and the States 
268. Duties levied by the Union but collected and appropriated by 
the States.—(1) Such stamp duties 2*** as are mentioned in the Union List shall 
be levied by the Government of India but shall be collected—
(a) in the case where such duties are leviable within any 3[Union 
territory], by the Government of India, and
(b) in other cases, by the States within which such duties are 
respectively leviable.
(2) The proceeds in any financial year of any such duty leviable within 
any State shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be 
assigned to that State.
4268A. [Service tax levied by Union and collected and appropriated by 
the Union and the States.].—Omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and 
First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 7 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "and such duties of excise on medicinal and toilet preparations"
omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 6, 
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for "State 
Specified in Part C of the First Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Ins. by the  Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (date not notifed). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
154
269. Taxes levied and collected by the Union but assigned to the 
States.—1[(1) Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods and taxes on the 
consignment of goods 2[except as provided in article 269A] shall be levied and 
collected by the Government of India but shall be assigned and shall be deemed 
to have been assigned to the States on or after the 1st day of April, 1996 in the 
manner provided in clause (2).
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause,—
(a) the expression "taxes on the sale or purchase of goods" shall 
mean taxes on sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, where 
such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or 
commerce;
(b) the expression "taxes on the consignment of goods" shall mean 
taxes on the consignment of goods (whether the consignment is to the 
person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes 
place in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.
(2) The net proceeds in any financial year of any such tax, except in so 
far as those proceeds represent proceeds attributable to Union territories, shall 
not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the 
States within which that tax is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed 
among those States in accordance with such principles of distribution as may be 
formulated by Parliament by law.]
3[(3) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a 
4[sale or purchase of, or consignment of goods] takes place in the course of 
inter-State trade or commerce.]
5[269A. Levy and collection of goods and services tax in course of 
inter-State trade or commerce.— (1) Goods and services tax on supplies in 
the course of inter-State trade or commerce shall be levied and collected by the 
Government of India and such tax shall be apportioned between the Union and 
the States in the manner as may be provided by Parliament by law on the 
recommendations of the Goods and Services Tax Council.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000. s. 2, for cls. (1) and (2)
(w.e.f. 9-6-2000).
2. 
Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016 s. 8, 
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982. s. 2, for "sale or 
purchase of goods" (w.e.f. 2-2-1983).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 9 
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
155
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, supply of goods, or of 
services, or both in the course of import into the territory of India shall be 
deemed to be supply of goods, or of services, or both in the course of inter-
State trade or commerce.
(2) The amount apportioned to a State under clause (1) shall not form 
part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) Where an amount collected as tax levied under clause (1) has been 
used for payment of the tax levied by a State under article 246A, such amount 
shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(4) Where an amount collected as tax levied by a State under article 
246A has been used for payment of the tax levied under clause (1), such 
amount shall not form part of the Consolidated Fund of the State.
(5) Parliament may, by law, formulate the principles for determining the 
place of supply, and when a supply of goods, or of services, or both takes place 
in the course of inter-State trade or commerce.] 
1[270. Taxes levied and distributed between the Union and the 
States.—(1) All taxes and duties referred to in the Union List, except the duties 
and taxes referred to in 2[articles 268, 269 and 269A], respectively, surcharge 
on taxes and duties referred to in article 271 and any cess levied for specific 
purposes under any law made by Parliament shall be levied and collected by 
the Government of India and shall be distributed between the Union and the 
States in the manner provided in clause (2).
3[(1A) The tax collected by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A 
shall also be distributed between the Union and the States in the manner 
provided in clause (2).
(1B) The tax levied and collected by the Union under clause (2) of 
article 246A and article 269A, which has been used for payment of the tax 
levied by the Union under clause (1) of article 246A, and the amount 
apportioned to the Union under clause (1) of article 269A, shall also be 
distributed between the Union and the States in the manner provided in clause 
(2).]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 3, for art. 270
(w.e.f. 1-4-1996).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 3, for “articles 268 
and 269” (not enforced) and further subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First 
Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 10, for “arts. 268, 268A and 269” (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
156
(2) Such percentage, as may be prescribed, of the net proceeds of any 
such tax or duty in any financial year shall not form part of the Consolidated 
Fund of India, but shall be assigned to the States within which that tax or duty 
is leviable in that year, and shall be distributed among those States in such 
manner and from such time as may be prescribed in the manner provided in 
clause (3).
(3) In this article, "prescribed" means, —
(i) until a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by 
the President by order, and
(ii) after a Finance Commission has been constituted, prescribed by 
the President by order after considering the recommendations of the  
Finance Commission.]
271. Surcharge on certain duties and taxes for purposes of the 
Union.—Notwithstanding anything in articles 269 and 270, Parliament may at 
any time increase any of the duties or taxes referred to in those articles 1[except 
the goods and services tax under article 246A,] by a surcharge for purposes of 
the Union and the whole proceeds of any such surcharge shall form part of the 
Consolidated Fund of India.
[272. Taxes which are levied and collected by the Union and may be 
distributed between the Union and the States.].—Omitted by the Constitution
(Eightieth Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 4. (w.e.f. 9-6-2000).
273. Grants in lieu of export duty on jute and jute products.—(1) 
There shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India in each year as 
grants-in-aid of the revenues of the States of Assam, Bihar, 2[Odisha] and West 
Bengal, in lieu of assignment of any share of the net proceeds in each year of 
export duty on jute and jute products to those States, such sums as may be 
prescribed.
(2) The sums so prescribed shall continue to be charged on the 
Consolidated Fund of India so long as any export duty on jute or jute products 
continues to be levied by the Government of India or until the expiration of ten 
years from the commencement of this Constitution whichever is earlier.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 11 
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016). 
2. Subs. by the Orissa (Alteration  of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011), s. 5, for "Orissa" 
(w.e.f. 1-11-2011).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
157
(3) In this article, the expression “prescribed” has the same meaning as 
in article 270. 
274. Prior recommendation of President required to Bills affecting 
taxation in which States are interested.—(1) No Bill or amendment which 
imposes or varies any tax or duty in which States are interested, or which varies 
the meaning of the expression “agricultural income” as defined for the purposes 
of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax, or which affects the principles 
on which under any of the foregoing provisions of this Chapter moneys are or 
may be distributable to States, or which imposes any such surcharge for the 
purposes of the Union as is mentioned in the foregoing provisions of this 
Chapter, shall be introduced or moved in either House of Parliament except on 
the recommendation of the President.
(2) In this article, the expression “tax or duty in which States are 
interested” means—
(a) a tax or duty the whole or part of the net proceeds whereof are 
assigned to any State; or
(b) a tax or duty by reference to the net proceeds whereof sums 
are for the time being payable out of the Consolidated Fund of India to 
any State.
275. Grants from the Union to certain States.—(1) Such sums as 
Parliament may by law provide shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of 
India in each year as grants-in-aid of the revenues of such States as Parliament 
may determine to be in need of assistance, and different sums may be fixed for 
different States:
Provided that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as 
grants-in-aid of the revenues of a State such capital and recurring sums as may 
be necessary to enable that State to meet the costs of such schemes of 
development as may be undertaken by the State with the approval of the 
Government of India for the purpose of promoting the welfare of the Scheduled 
Tribes in that State or raising the level of administration of the Scheduled Areas 
therein to that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State:
Provided further that there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India as grants-in-aid of the revenues of the State of Assam sums, capital and 
recurring, equivalent to—

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
158
(a) the average excess of expenditure over the revenues during the 
two years immediately preceding the commencement of this Constitution 
in respect of the administration of the tribal areas specified in 1[Part I] of 
the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule; and
(b) the costs of such schemes of development as may be 
undertaken by that State with the approval of the Government of India 
for the purpose of raising the level of administration of the said areas to 
that of the administration of the rest of the areas of that State.
2[(1A) On and from the formation of the autonomous State under article 
244A,— 
(i) any sums payable under clause (a) of the second proviso to 
clause (1) shall, if the autonomous State comprises all the tribal areas 
referred to therein, be paid to the autonomous State, and, if the 
autonomous State comprises only some of those tribal areas, be 
apportioned between the State of Assam and the autonomous State as the 
President may, by order, specify;
(ii) there shall be paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India as 
grants-in-aid of the revenues of the autonomous State sums, capital and 
recurring, equivalent to the costs of such schemes of development as 
may be undertaken by the autonomous State with the approval of the 
Government of India for the purpose of raising the level of 
administration of that State to that of the administration of the rest of the 
State of Assam.]
(2) Until provision is made by Parliament under clause (1), the powers 
conferred on Parliament under that clause shall be exercisable by the President 
by order and any order made by the President under this clause shall have effect 
subject to any provision so made by Parliament:
Provided that after a Finance Commission has been constituted no order 
shall be made under this clause by the President except after considering the 
recommendations of the Finance Commission.
276. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in article 246, no law of the Legislature of a State relating 
to taxes for the benefit of the State or of a municipality, district board, local board or 
other local authority therein in respect of professions, trades, callings or 
employments shall be invalid on the ground that it relates to a tax on income.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971) s. 71, 
for "Part A" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25-9-1969).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
159
(2) The total amount payable in respect of any one person to the State or 
to any one municipality, district board, local board or other local authority in 
the State by way of taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments 
shall not exceed 1[two thousand and five hundred rupees] per annum. 
 2*  
        * 
* 
              *
(3) The power of the Legislature of a State to make laws as aforesaid 
with respect to taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments shall not 
be construed as limiting in any way the power of Parliament to make laws with 
respect to taxes on income accruing from or arising out of professions, trades, 
callings and employments.
277. Savings.—Any taxes, duties, cesses or fees which, immediately 
before the commencement of this Constitution, were being lawfully levied by 
the Government of any State or by any municipality or other local authority or 
body for the purposes of the State, municipality, district or other local area 
may, notwithstanding that those taxes, duties, cesses or fees are mentioned in 
the Union List, continue to be levied and to be applied to the same purposes 
until provision to the contrary is made by Parliament by law.
278. [Agreement with States in Part B of the First Schedule with regard 
to certain financial matters.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
279. Calculation of “net proceeds”, etc.—(1) In the foregoing 
provisions of this Chapter, “net proceeds” means in relation to any tax or duty 
the proceeds thereof reduced by the cost of collection, and for the purposes of 
those provisions the net proceeds of any tax or duty, or of any part of any tax or 
duty, in or attributable to any area shall be ascertained and certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, whose certificate shall be final.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, and to any other express provision of this 
Chapter, a law made by Parliament or an order of the President may, in any 
case where under this Part the proceeds of any duty or tax are, or may be, 
assigned to any State, provide for the manner in which the proceeds are to be 
calculated, for the time from or at which and the manner in which any 
payments are to be made, for the making of adjustments between one financial 
year and another, and for any other incidental or ancillary matters.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixtieth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2, for "two hundred and 
fifty rupees" (w.e.f. 20-12-1988).
2. Proviso omitted by s.2, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-12-1988).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
160
1[279A. Goods and Services Tax Council.—(1) The President shall, 
within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Constitution (One 
Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, by order, constitute a Council to be 
called the Goods and Services Tax Council.
(2) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall consist of the following 
members, namely:— 
(a) the Union Finance Minister — Chairperson;
(b) the Union Minister of State in charge of Revenue or
Finance — Member;
(c) the Minister in charge of Finance or Taxation or any other 
Minister nominated by each State Government — Members.
(3) The Members of the Goods and Services Tax Council referred to in 
sub-clause (c) of clause (2) shall, as soon as may be, choose one amongst 
themselves to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Council for such period as they 
may decide. 
(4) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall make recommendations to 
the Union and the States on—
(a) the taxes, cesses and surcharges levied by the Union, the 
States and the local bodies which may be subsumed in the goods and 
services tax;
(b) the goods and services that may be subjected to, or exempted 
from, the goods and services tax;
(c) model Goods and Services Tax Laws, principles of levy, 
apportionment of Goods and Services Tax levied on supplies in the 
course of inter-State trade or commerce under article 269A and the 
principles that govern the place of supply;
(d) the threshold limit of turnover below which goods and services 
may be exempted from goods and services tax;
(e) the rates including floor rates with bands of goods and services 
tax;
(f) any special rate or rates for a specified period, to raise 
additional resources during any natural calamity or disaster;
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 12 
(w.e.f. 12-9-2016). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
161
(g) special provision with respect to the States of Arunachal 
Pradesh, Assam, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand; and
(h) any other matter relating to the goods and services tax, as the 
Council may decide.
(5) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall recommend the date on 
which the goods and services tax be levied on petroleum crude, high speed 
diesel, motor spirit (commonly known as petrol), natural gas and aviation 
turbine fuel. 
(6) While discharging the functions conferred by this article, the Goods 
and Services Tax Council shall be guided by the need for a harmonised 
structure of goods and services tax and for the development of a harmonised 
national market for goods and services.
(7) One-half of the total number of Members of the Goods and Services 
Tax Council shall constitute the quorum at its meetings.
(8) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall determine the procedure 
in the performance of its functions.
(9) Every decision of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall be taken 
at a meeting, by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the weighted votes 
of the members present and voting, in accordance with the following principles, 
namely:—
(a) the vote of the Central Government shall have a weightage of 
one-third of the total votes cast; and
(b) the votes of all the State Governments taken together shall 
have a weightage of two-thirds of the total votes cast, 
in that meeting.
(10) No act or proceedings of the Goods and Services Tax Council shall 
be invalid merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of the 
Council; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member of the 
Council; or
(c) any procedural irregularity of the Council not affecting the 
merits of the case.
(11) The Goods and Services Tax Council shall establish a mechanism to 
adjudicate any dispute—

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
162
(a) between the Government of India and one or more States; or
(b) between the Government of India and any State or States on 
one side and one or more other States on the other side; or
(c) between two or more States, 
arising out of the recommendations of the Council or implementation thereof.]
280. Finance Commission.—(1) The President shall, within two years 
from the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of 
every fifth year or at such earlier time as the President considers necessary, by 
order constitute a Finance Commission which shall consist of a Chairman and 
four other members to be appointed by the President.  
(2) Parliament may by law determine the qualifications which shall be 
requisite for appointment as members of the Commission and the manner in 
which they shall be selected. 
(3) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to 
the President as to—
(a) the distribution between the Union and the States of the net 
proceeds of taxes which are to be, or may be, divided between them 
under this Chapter and the allocation between the States of the respective 
shares of such proceeds;  
(b) the principles which should govern the grants-in-aid of the 
revenues of the States out of the Consolidated Fund of India;
1[(bb) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a 
State to supplement the resources of the Panchayats in the State on the basis 
of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of the State;]
2[(c) the measures needed to augment the Consolidated Fund of a 
State to supplement the resources of the Municipalities in the State on 
the basis of the recommendations made by the Finance Commission of 
the State;]
3[(d)] any other matter referred to the Commission by the 
President in the interests of sound finance.
(4) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such 
powers in the performance of their functions as Parliament may by law confer 
on them.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).
3. Sub-clause (c) re-lettered as sub-clause (d) by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-1993).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
163
281. Recommendations of the Finance Commission.—The President 
shall cause every recommendation made by the Finance Commission under the 
provisions of this Constitution together with an explanatory memorandum as to 
the action taken thereon to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions 
282. Expenditure defrayable by the Union or a State out of its 
revenues.—The Union or a State may make any grants for any public purpose, 
notwithstanding that the purpose is not one with respect to which Parliament or 
the Legislature of the State, as the case may be, may make laws. 
283. Custody, etc., of Consolidated Funds, Contingency Funds and 
moneys credited to the public accounts.—(1) The custody of the 
Consolidated Fund of India and the Contingency Fund of India, the payment of 
moneys into such Funds, the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of 
public moneys other than those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf 
of the Government of India, their payment into the public account of India and 
the withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected 
with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by 
Parliament, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by 
rules made by the President. 
(2) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of a State and the 
Contingency Fund of a State, the payment of moneys into such Funds, the 
withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of public moneys other than 
those credited to such Funds received by or on behalf of the Government of the 
State, their payment into the public account of the State and the withdrawal of 
moneys from such account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to 
matters aforesaid shall be regulated by law made by the Legislature of the 
State, and, until provision in that behalf is so made, shall be regulated by rules 
made by the Governor 1*** of the State.
284. Custody of suitors' deposits and other moneys received by 
public servants and courts.—All moneys received by or deposited with—
(a) any officer employed in connection with the affairs of the 
Union or of a State in his capacity as such, other than revenues or 
public moneys raised or received by the Government of India or the 
Government of the State, as the case may be; or
(b) any court within the territory of India to the credit of any 
cause, matter, account or persons,
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
164
shall be paid into the public account of India or the public account of State, as 
the case may be.
285. Exemption of property of the Union from State taxation.—(1) 
The property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law 
otherwise provide, be exempt from all taxes imposed by a State or by any 
authority within a State.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall, until Parliament by law otherwise 
provides, prevent any authority within a State from levying any tax on any 
property of the Union to which such property was immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long as that 
tax continues to be levied in that State.
286. Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or purchase of 
goods.—(1)  No law of a State shall impose, or authorise the imposition of, a 
tax on 1[the supply of goods or of services or both, where such supply takes  
place]— 
(a) outside the State; or 
(b) in the course of the import of the 2[goods or services or both]
into, or export of the 2[goods or services or both] out of, the territory of 
India.
3[*
*
*                         
*]
4[(2) Parliament may by law formulate principles for determining when a 
5[supply of goods or of services or both] in any of the ways mentioned in 
clause (1).
6[(3) *
*
*                         *]
287. Exemption from taxes on electricity.—Save in so far as 
Parliament may by law otherwise provide, no law of a State shall impose, or 
authorise the imposition of, a tax on the consumption or sale of electricity
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 13, (i)(A) 
for "the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes place"
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Subs. by s. 13 (i)(B), ibid., for "goods" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Explanation to cl. (1) omitted by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 4 
(w.e.f. 11-9-1956).
4. Subs. by s.4, ibid., for cls. (2) and (3) (w.e.f. 11-9-1956).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 13(ii), 
for "sale or purchase of goods takes place" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
6. Cl. (3) omitted by s. 13 (iii), ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
165
(whether produced by a Government or other persons) which is— 
(a) consumed by the Government of India, or sold to the 
Government of India for consumption by that Government; or
(b) consumed in the construction, maintenance or operation of any 
railway by the Government of India or a railway company operating that 
railway, or sold to that Government or any such railway company for 
consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any 
railway,
and any such law imposing, or authorising the imposition of, a tax on the sale 
of electricity shall secure that the price of electricity sold to the Government of 
India for consumption by that Government, or to any such railway company as 
aforesaid for consumption in the construction, maintenance or operation of any 
railway, shall be less by the amount of the tax than the price charged to other 
consumers of a substantial quantity of  electricity.
288. Exemption from taxation by States in respect of water or 
electricity in certain cases.—(1) Save in so far as the President may by order 
otherwise provide, no law of a State in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution shall impose, or authorise the imposition 
of, a tax in respect of any water or electricity stored, generated, consumed, 
distributed or sold by any authority established by any existing law or any law 
made by Parliament for regulating or developing any inter-State river or 
river-valley.
Explanation.—The expression “law of a State in force” in this clause 
shall include a law of a State passed or made before the commencement of this 
Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it 
may not be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.
(2) The Legislature of a State may by law impose, or authorise the 
imposition of, any such tax as is mentioned in clause (1), but no such law shall 
have any effect unless it has, after having been reserved for the consideration of 
the President, received his assent; and if any such law provides for the fixation 
of the rates and other incidents of such tax by means of rules or orders to be 
made under the law by any authority, the law shall provide for the previous 
consent of the President being obtained to the making of any such rule or order.
289. Exemption of property and income of a State from Union 
taxation.—(1)  The property and income of a State shall be exempt from Union 
taxation.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
166
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent the Union from imposing, or 
authorising the imposition of, any tax to such extent, if any, as Parliament may 
by law provide in respect of a trade or business of any kind carried on by, or on 
behalf of, the Government of a State, or any operations connected therewith, or 
any property used or occupied for the purposes of such trade or business, or any 
income accruing or arising in connection therewith.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall apply to any trade or business, or to any 
class of trade or business, which Parliament may by law declare to be incidental 
to the ordinary functions of Government.
290. Adjustment in respect of certain expenses and pensions.—
Where under the provisions of this Constitution the expenses of any court or 
Commission, or the pension payable to or in respect of a person who has served 
before the commencement of this Constitution under the Crown in India or 
after such commencement in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a 
State, are charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund 
of a State, then, if—
(a) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated Fund of India, the 
court or Commission serves any of the separate needs of a State, or the 
person has served wholly or in part in connection with the affairs of a 
State; or
(b) in the case of a charge on the Consolidated Fund of a State, the 
court or  Commission serves any of the separate needs of the Union or 
another State, or the person has served wholly or  in part in connection 
with the affairs of the Union or another State,
there shall be charged on and paid  out of the Consolidated Fund of the State or, 
as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of 
the other State, such contribution in respect of the expenses or pension as may 
be agreed, or as may in default of agreement be determined by an arbitrator to 
be appointed by the Chief Justice of India.
1[290A. Annual payment to certain Devaswom Funds.—A sum of 
forty-six lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be charged on, and paid out of, 
the Consolidated Fund of the State of Kerala every year to the Travancore 
Devaswom Fund; and a sum of thirteen lakhs and fifty thousand rupees shall be 
charged on, and paid out of, the Consolidated Fund of the State of 2[Tamil 
Nadu] every year to the Devaswom Fund established in that State for the 
maintenance of Hindu temples and shrines in the territories transferred to that 
State on the 1st day of November, 1956, from the State of Travancore-Cochin.]
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 4, for 
"Madras" (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
167
291. [Privy purse sums of Rulers.].—Omitted by the Constitution 
(Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-12-1971). 
CHAPTER II.—BORROWING
292. Borrowing by the Government of India.—The executive power 
of the Union extends to borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund 
of India within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by 
Parliament by law and to the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as 
may be so fixed. 
293. Borrowing by States.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, 
the executive power of a State extends to borrowing within the territory of India 
upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the State within such limits, if any, 
as may from time to time be fixed by the Legislature of such State by law and to  
the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as may be so fixed. 
(2) The Government of India may, subject to such conditions as may be 
laid down by or under any law made by Parliament, make loans to any State or, 
so long as any limits fixed under article 292 are not exceeded, give guarantees 
in respect of loans raised by any State, and any sums required for the purpose 
of making such loans shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.
(3) A State may not without the consent of the Government of India raise 
any loan if there is still outstanding any part of a loan which has been made to 
the State by the Government of India or by its predecessor Government, or in 
respect of which a guarantee  has been given by the Government of India or by 
its predecessor Government.
(4) A consent under clause (3) may be granted subject to such 
conditions, if any, as the Government of India may think fit to impose.
CHAPTER III.—PROPERTY, CONTRACTS, RIGHTS, LIABILITIES,
OBLIGATIONS AND SUITS
294. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations 
in certain cases.—As from the commencement of this Constitution—
(a) all property and assets which immediately before such 
commencement were vested in His Majesty for the purposes of the 
Government of the Dominion of India and all property and assets which 
immediately before such commencement were vested in His Majesty for 
the purposes of the Government of each Governor’s Province shall vest 
respectively in the Union and the corresponding State; and 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
168
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the 
Dominion of India and of the Government of each Governor's Province, 
whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, 
liabilities and obligations respectively of the Government of India and 
the Government of each corresponding State,
subject to any adjustment made or to be made by reason of the creation before 
the commencement of this Constitution of the Dominion of Pakistan or of the 
Provinces of West Bengal, East Bengal, West Punjab and East Punjab.
295. Succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations 
in other cases.—(1) As from the commencement of this Constitution—
(a) all property and assets which immediately before such 
commencement were vested in any Indian State corresponding to a State 
specified in Part B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union, if the 
purposes for which such property and assets were held immediately 
before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Union 
relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List, and 
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of any 
Indian State corresponding to a State specified in Part B of the First 
Schedule, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the 
rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of India, if the purposes 
for which such rights were acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurred 
before such commencement will thereafter be purposes of the Government 
of India relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List,
subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf by the Government of India 
with the Government of that State.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Government of each State specified in Part B 
of the First Schedule shall, as from the commencement of this Constitution, be the 
successor of the Government of the corresponding Indian State as regards all 
property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising out 
of any contract or otherwise, other than those referred to in clause (1).
296. Property accruing by escheat or lapse or as bona vacantia.—
Subject as hereinafter provided, any property in the territory of India which, if 
this Constitution had not come into operation, would have accrued to His Majesty 
or, as the case may be, to the Ruler of an Indian State by escheat or lapse, or as 
bona vacantia for want of a rightful owner, shall, if it is property situate in a 
State, vest in such State, and shall, in any other case, vest in the Union:

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
169
Provided that any property which at the date when it would have so 
accrued to His Majesty or to the Ruler of an Indian State was in the possession 
or under the control of the Government of India or the Government of a State 
shall, according as the purposes for which it was then used or held were 
purposes of the Union or of a State, vest in the Union or in that State.
Explanation.—In this article, the expressions “Ruler” and “Indian State” 
have the same meanings as in article 363.
1[297. Things of value within territorial waters or continental shelf 
and resources of the exclusive economic zone to vest in the Union.—(1) All 
lands, minerals and other things of value underlying the ocean within the 
territorial waters, or the continental shelf, or the exclusive economic zone, of 
India shall vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union.
(2) All other resources of the exclusive economic zone of India shall also 
vest in the Union and be held for the purposes of the Union.
(3) The limits of the territorial waters, the continental shelf, the exclusive 
economic zone, and other maritime zones, of India shall be such as may be 
specified, from time to time, by or under any law made by Parliament.]
2[298. Power to carry on trade, etc.—The executive power of the 
Union and of each State shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or business 
and to the acquisition, holding and disposal of property and the making of 
contracts for any purpose:
Provided that—
(a) the said executive power of the Union shall, in so far as such 
trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which 
Parliament may make laws, be subject in each State to legislation by the 
State; and
(b) the said executive power of each State shall, in so far as such 
trade or business or such purpose is not one with respect to which the 
State Legislature may make laws, be subject to legislation by 
Parliament.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27-5-1976).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XII.—Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits) 
170
299. Contracts.—(1) All contracts made in the exercise of the executive 
power of the Union or of a State shall be expressed to be made by the 
President, or by the Governor 1*** of the State, as the case may be, and all such 
contracts and all assurances of property made in the exercise of that power shall 
be executed on behalf of the President or the Governor 1*** by such persons 
and in such manner as he may direct or authorise.
(2) Neither the President nor the Governor 2*** shall be personally liable 
in respect of any contract or assurance made or executed for the purposes of 
this Constitution, or for the purposes of any enactment relating to the 
Government of India heretofore in force, nor shall any person making or 
executing any such contract or assurance on behalf of any of them be 
personally liable in respect thereof.
300. Suits and proceedings.—(1) The Government of India may sue or 
be sued by the name of the Union of India and the Government of a State may 
sue or be sued by the name of the State and may, subject to any provisions 
which may be made by Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of such State 
enacted by virtue of powers conferred by this Constitution, sue or be sued in 
relation to their respective affairs in the like cases as the Dominion of India and 
the corresponding Provinces or the corresponding Indian States might have 
sued or been sued if this Constitution had not been enacted.
(2) If at the commencement of this Constitution—
(a) any legal proceedings are pending to which the Dominion of 
India is a party, the Union of India shall be deemed to be substituted for 
the Dominion in those proceedings; and
(b) any legal proceedings are pending to which a Province or an 
Indian State is a party, the corresponding State shall be deemed to be 
substituted for the Province or the Indian State in those proceedings. 
3[CHAPTER IV.—RIGHT TO PROPERTY
300A. Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of  
law.— No person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law.]
______________________________________________
1. The words "or the Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "nor the  Rajpramukh" omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 34 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

 
171
PART XIII
TRADE, COMMERCE AND INTERCOURSE WITHIN THE 
TERRITORY OF INDIA 
301. Freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse.—Subject to the 
other provisions of this Part,   trade, commerce  and intercourse throughout  the 
territory of India shall be free. 
302. Power of Parliament to impose  restrictions on trade, commerce 
and intercourse.—Parliament may  by law impose such restrictions on the 
freedom of trade, commerce or intercourse between one State and another or 
within any part of the territory of India  as may be required in the public 
interest.
303. Restrictions on the legislative powers of the Union and of the 
States with regard to trade  and commerce.—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
in article 302, neither Parliament nor the Legislature of a State shall have power 
to make any law giving, or authorising the giving of, any preference to one 
State over another, or making, or authorising the making of, any discrimination  
between one State and another, by virtue of any entry relating to trade  and 
commerce in any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall prevent Parliament from making any law 
giving, or authorising  the giving of, any preference or making, or authorising 
the making of, any discrimination if it is declared by such law that it is 
necessary to do so for the purpose of dealing with a situation arising from 
scarcity of goods in any part of the territory of India.
304. Restrictions on  trade, commerce and intercourse  among 
States.—Notwithstanding anything in article 301  or article  303, the 
Legislature of a State  may by law—
(a) impose on goods imported from other States 1[or the Union 
territories] any tax to which similar goods manufactured or produced in 
that State are subject, so, however, as not to discriminate between goods 
so imported and goods so manufactured or produced; and
(b) impose such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade, 
commerce or intercourse with or within that State as may be required in 
the public interest:
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.                 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIII.—Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the Territory of India)
172
Provided that no Bill or amendment for the purposes of clause (b) shall 
be introduced or moved in the Legislature of a State without the previous 
sanction of the President.
1[305. Saving of existing laws and laws providing for State 
monopolies.—Nothing in articles 301 and 303  shall affect  the provisions of 
any existing law except in so far  as the President may by order otherwise 
direct; and nothing in article 301 shall affect the operation  of any law made 
before the commencement of the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, 
in so far as it  relates to, or prevent Parliament or the Legislature of a State from 
making any law relating to, any such matter as is referred to in sub-clause (ii) 
of clause (6) of article 19.]
306. [Power  of  certain States in  Part B  of  the First Schedule to 
impose restrictions on trade and commerce.].—Omitted by the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-11-1956)
307. Appointment of authority for carrying out the purposes of 
articles 301 to 304.—Parliament may by law appoint such  authority as it 
considers appropriate for carrying out the purposes  of articles 301, 302, 303 
and 304, and confer on the  authority so appointed such powers and such duties 
as it thinks necessary.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, s. 4, for art. 305          
(w.e.f. 27-4-1955).

173
PART XIV
SERVICES UNDER THE UNION AND THE STATES
CHAPTER I.— SERVICES 
308. Interpretation.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, 
the expression “State” 1[does not include the State of Jammu and  Kashmir].
309. Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the 
Union or a State.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the 
appropriate Legislature may regulate the recruitment, and conditions of service 
of persons appointed, to public services and posts in connection with the affairs  
of the Union or of any State:
Provided that it shall be competent for the President or such person as he 
may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the 
Union, and for the Governor 2*** of a State or such person as he may direct in 
the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the  State, to 
make  rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of service  of persons 
appointed, to such services and posts until provision in that behalf is made by 
or under an Act of the appropriate Legislature under this article, and any rules 
so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of any such Act.
310. Tenure of office of persons serving the Union or a State.—(1) 
Except as expressly provided by this Constitution,  every person who is a 
member of a  defence service or of  a civil service of the Union or of an 
all-India service or holds any post connected with defence or any civil post 
under the Union holds office during the pleasure of the President, and  every  
person who is  a member of a civil service of a State or holds any civil post 
under a State holds office  during  the pleasure of the Governor 3*** of the 
State.
(2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civil post under the Union or 
a State holds office during the pleasure of the President or, as the case may be, 
of the Governor 2*** of the State, any contract under which a person, not being 
a member of a defence service or of an all-India service or of a civil service of 
the Union or a State, is appointed under this Constitution to hold such a post 
may, if the President or the Governor 42***, as the case may be, deems it 
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch., for "means 
a State specified in Part A or  Part B of the First Schedule" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by s.29 and Sch., ibid (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. The words "or, as the case may be, the Rajpramukh" omitted by s.29 and Sch., ibid. .
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
174
necessary in order to secure the services of a person having special 
qualifications, provide  for the payment to him of  compensation, if before the 
expiration of an agreed period that post is abolished or he is, for reasons not 
connected with any misconduct on  his part, required to vacate that post.
311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in 
civil capacities under the Union or a State.—(1) No person who is a member 
of a civil service of the  Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a  
State or holds a civil post under  the Union or a State shall be dismissed or 
removed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.  
1[(2) No such person  as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or 
reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the 
charges against him and given a reasonable  opportunity of being heard in 
respect of those charges 2***:
3[Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon 
him any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the 
evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such 
person any opportunity of making  representation on  the penalty proposed:
Provided further that this clause shall not apply—]
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on 
the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal 
charge; or
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person 
or to reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded 
by that authority in writing, it is not  reasonably practicable to hold such 
inquiry; or
(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is 
satisfied that in the interest of the security of the State it is not expedient 
to hold such inquiry.
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises 
whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in 
clause (2), the decision thereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or 
remove such person  or to reduce him in rank shall be final.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 10, for cls. (2) and (3) 
(w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 44 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Subs. by s. 44, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
175
312. All-India services.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in 1[Chapter VI 
of Part VI or Part XI], if the Council of States has declared by resolution 
supported by not less than two-thirds of the members present and voting that it 
is necessary or expedient in the national interest so to do, Parliament may by 
law provide for the creation of one  or more all India services 2[(including  an 
all-India judicial service)] common to the Union and the States, and, subject to 
the other provisions of this Chapter, regulate the recruitment, and the 
conditions of service of persons appointed, to any such service.
(2) The services known at the commencement of this Constitution as the 
Indian Administrative Service and the Indian Police Service shall be deemed to 
be services created by Parliament under this article.
2[(3) The all-India judicial   service referred to in clause (1) shall not 
include any post inferior to that of a district judge as defined in article 236.
(4) The law providing for the creation of the all-India judicial service 
aforesaid may contain such provisions for the amendment of Chapter VI of 
Part VI as may be necessary for giving effect to the provisions of that law and 
no such law shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the 
purposes of article 368.]
3[312A. Power of Parliament to vary or revoke conditions of service 
of officers of certain services.—(1) Parliament may by law—
(a) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the 
conditions of services as respects remuneration, leave and pension and 
the rights as respects disciplinary matters of persons who, having been 
appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a 
civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement  of this 
Constitution, continue on and after the commencement of the 
Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, to serve under the 
Government of India or of  a State in any service or post;
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 45, for "Part XI" 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Ins. by  s. 45, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29-8-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
176
(b) vary or revoke, whether prospectively or retrospectively, the 
conditions of service as respects pension of  persons who, having been 
appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State in Council to a 
civil service of the Crown in India before the commencement of this 
Constitution, retired or otherwise ceased to be in service at any time 
before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-eighth 
Amendment) Act, 1972:
Provided that in the case of  any such person who is holding or has held 
the office  of the Chief Justice or  other Judge of the Supreme Court or a High 
Court, the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, the Chairman or other 
member of the Union or a State Public Service Commission or the Chief 
Election Commissioner, nothing in sub-clause (a) or sub-clause (b) shall be 
construed as empowering Parliament to vary or revoke, after his appointment  
to such post, the conditions of his service to his disadvantage except in so far as 
such conditions of service are applicable to him by reason of his being  a 
person appointed by the Secretary of State or Secretary of State  in Council to a 
civil service of the Crown in India.
(2) Except to the extent provided for by Parliament by law under this 
article, nothing in this article shall affect the power of  any Legislature or other 
authority under any other  provision of this Constitution to regulate the 
conditions  of service of persons referred to in clause (1).
(3) Neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have jurisdiction in—
(a) any dispute arising out of any provision of, or any 
endorsement on, any covenant, agreement or other similar instrument 
which was entered into or executed by any person referred to in 
clause (1), or arising out of any letter issued to such person, in relation to 
his appointment to any civil service of the Crown in India or his 
continuance in service under the Government of the Dominion  of India 
or a Province thereof;
(b) any dispute in  respect of any right, liability or obligation 
under article 314 as originally enacted.
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything in article 314 as originally enacted or in any other provision  of this 
Constitution.]

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
177
313. Transitional provisions.—Until other provision is made in this 
behalf under this Constitution, all the laws in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution and applicable to any public service or any 
post which continues to exist after the commencement of this Constitution, as 
an all-India service or as service or post under the Union or a State shall 
continue in force so far as consistent with the provisions of this Constitution.
314. [Provision for protection of existing officers of certain services.].—
Omitted by 
the 
Constitution (Twenty-eighth 
Amendment) Act, 
1972, 
s. 3 (w.e.f. 29-8-1972).
CHAPTER II.— PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSIONS
315. Public Service Commissions for the Union and for the States.—
(1) Subject to the provisions of this article, there shall be a Public Service 
Commission for the Union and a Public Service Commission for each State. 
(2) Two or more States may agree that there shall be one Public Service 
Commission for that group of States, and if a resolution to that effect is passed 
by the House or, where there are two Houses, by each House of the Legislature 
of each of those States, Parliament may by law provide for the appointment of a 
Joint State Public Service Commission (referred to in this Chapter as Joint 
Commission) to  serve the needs of those States.
(3) Any such law as aforesaid may contain such incidental and 
consequential provisions as may be necessary or desirable for giving effect to 
the purposes of the law.
(4) The Public Service Commission for the Union, if requested so to do 
by the Governor 1*** of a State, may, with the approval of the President, agree 
to serve all or any of the needs  of the State.
(5) References in this Constitution to the Union Public Service 
Commission or a State Public Service Commission shall, unless the context 
otherwise requires, be construed as references to the Commission  serving the 
needs of the Union or, as the case may be, the State as respects the  particular 
matter  in question.
316. Appointment and term of office of members.—(1) The Chairman 
and other members of  a Public Service Commission shall be appointed, in the 
case of the  Union Commission or a Joint Commission, by the President, and in 
the case of a State  Commission, by the Governor of the State:
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
178
Provided that as nearly as may be one-half of the members of every 
Public Service Commission shall be persons who at the dates of their respective 
appointments have held office for at least ten  years either under  the 
Government of India or under the Government of a State, and in computing the 
said period of ten years any period before the commencement of this 
Constitution during which a person has held office  under the Crown in India or 
under the Government of an  Indian State shall be included.
1[(1A) If the office of the Chairman of the Commission becomes vacant 
or if any such Chairman is by reason of absence or for any other reason unable 
to perform the duties of his office, those  duties shall, until some person 
appointed under clause (1) to the vacant office has entered on the duties thereof 
or, as the case may be, until the Chairman has resumed his duties, be performed 
by such one  of the other members of the Commission  as  the President, in the 
case of the Union Commission or a Joint Commission,  and the Governor of the 
State in the case of a State Commission, may appoint  for the purpose.]
(2) A member of a Public Service Commission shall hold office for a 
term of six years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he 
attains, in the case of the Union Commission, the age of sixty-five years, and in 
the case of a State Commission or a Joint Commission, the age of 2[sixty-two 
years], whichever is earlier:
Provided that—
(a) a member of a Public Service Commission may, by writing  under 
his hand  addressed, in the case of the Union Commission  or a Joint 
Commission, to the President, and in the case of a State Commission, to 
the Governor 3*** of the State, resign his office;
(b) a member of a Public Service Commission may be removed from 
his  office in the manner provided in  clause (1) or clause (3) of          
article  317.
(3) A person who holds office as a member of a Public Service 
Commission shall, on the expiration of his term of office, be ineligible for 
re-appointment to that office.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 11 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-first Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 2, for "sixty years" 
(w.e.f. 7-9-1976).
3. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
179
317. Removal and suspension of a member of a Public Service 
Commission.—(1) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), the Chairman  or 
any other member of a Public Service Commission shall  only be removed from 
his office by order of the President on the ground of misbehaviour after the 
Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry 
held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf under 
article 145, reported that the Chairman or such other member, as the case may  
be, ought  on any such ground to be removed. 
(2) The President, in the case of the  Union Commission or a Joint 
Commission, and the Governor 1*** in the case  of a State Commission, may 
suspend from office the Chairman  or any other member of the Commission in  
respect of whom a reference  has been made to the Supreme Court under   
clause (1) until the President has passed orders on receipt  of the report of the 
Supreme Court on such reference.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), the President may by order 
remove from office the Chairman or any other member of a Public Service 
Commission if the Chairman or  such other member, as the case may be,—
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside 
the duties of his office; or
(c) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by 
reason of infirmity of mind or body.
(4) If the Chairman or any other member of  a Public Service 
Commission is or becomes in any way concerned or interested in any contract 
or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or the  
Government of a State or participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any 
benefit or emolument arising therefrom otherwise than as a member and in 
common with  the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the 
purposes of clause (1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.
318. Power to make regulations as to conditions of service of 
members and staff of the Commission.—In the case of the Union 
Commission or a Joint Commission, the President and, in the case of a State 
Commission, the Governor 1*** of the  State may by regulations—
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
180
(a) determine the number of members of the Commission and their 
conditions of service; and
(b) make provision with respect to the number of members of the 
staff of the Commission and their conditions of service:
Provided that the conditions of service of a member of a Public Service 
Commission shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
319. Prohibition as to the holding of offices by members of 
Commission on ceasing to be such members.—On ceasing to hold office—
(a) the Chairman of the Union Public Service Commission shall be 
ineligible for further employment either under the Government of India 
or under the Government of a State;
(b) the Chairman of a State Public Service Commission shall be 
eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any other member of the 
Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of any other State 
Public Service Commission, but not for any other employment either 
under the Government of India or under the Government of a State;
(c) a member other than the Chairman of the Union Public Service 
Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman of the 
Union Public Service Commission or as the Chairman of a State Public 
Service Commission, but not for any other employment either under the 
Government of India or under the Government of a State;
(d) a member other than the Chairman of a State Public Service 
Commission shall be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or any 
other member of the Union Public Service Commission or as the 
Chairman of that or any other State Public Service Commission, but not 
for any other employment either under the Government of India or under 
the Government of a State.
320. Functions of Public Service Commissions.—(1) It shall be the 
duty of the Union and the State Public Service Commissions to conduct 
examinations for appointments to the services of the Union and the services of 
the State respectively.
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Union Public Service Commission, if 
requested by any two or more States so to do, to assist those States in framing 
and operating schemes of joint recruitment for any services for which 
candidates possessing special qualifications are required.
(3) The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service 
Commission, as the case may be, shall be consulted—

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
181
(a) on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil 
services and for civil posts; 
(b) on the principles to be followed in making appointments to 
civil services and posts and in making promotions and transfers from one 
service to another and on the suitability of candidates for such 
appointments, promotions or transfers;
(c) on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the 
Government of India or the Government of a State in a civil capacity, 
including memorials or petitions relating to such matters;
(d) on  any claim by or in respect of a person who is serving or 
has served under the Government of India or the Government of a State 
or under the Crown in India or under the Government of an Indian State, 
in a civil capacity, that any costs incurred by him in defending legal 
proceedings instituted against him in respect of acts done or purporting 
to be done in the execution of his duty should be paid out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India, or, as the case may be, out of the 
Consolidated Fund of the State;
(e) on any claim for the award of a pension in respect of injuries 
sustained by a person while serving under the Government of India or 
the Government of a State or under the Crown in India or under the 
Government of an Indian State, in a civil capacity, and any question as to 
the amount of any such award,
and it shall be the duty of a Public Service Commission to advise on any matter 
so referred to them and on any other matter which the President, or, as the case 
may be, the Governor 1*** of the State, may refer to them:
Provided that the President as respects the all-India services and also as 
respects other services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, 
and the Governor 2***, as respects other services and posts in connection with 
the affairs of a State, may make regulations specifying the matters in which 
either generally, or in any particular class of case or in any particular 
circumstances, it shall not be necessary for a Public Service Commission to be 
consulted.
(4) Nothing in clause (3) shall require a Public Service Commission to 
be consulted as respects the manner in which any provision referred to in 
clause (4) of article 16 may be made or as respects the manner in which effect 
may be given to the provisions of article 335.
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh, as the case may be" omitted by s. 29 and Sch. ibid.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIV.—Services under the Union and the States)  
182
(5) All regulations made under the proviso to clause (3) by the President 
or the Governor 1*** of a State shall be laid for not less than fourteen days 
before each House of Parliament or the House or each House of the Legislature 
of the State, as the case may be, as soon as possible after they are made, and 
shall be subject to such modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, 
as both Houses of Parliament or the House or both Houses of the Legislature of 
the State may make during the session in which they are so laid.
321. Power to extend functions of Public Service Commissions.—An 
Act made by Parliament or, as the case may be, the Legislature of a State may 
provide for the exercise of additional functions by the Union Public Service 
Commission or the State Public Service Commission as respects the services of 
the Union or the State and also as respects the services of any local authority or 
other body corporate constituted by law or of any public institution.
322. Expenses of Public Service Commissions.—The expenses of the 
Union or a State Public Service Commission, including any salaries, 
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the members or staff of the 
Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India or, as the case 
may be, the Consolidated Fund of the State.
323. Reports of Public Service Commissions.—(1) It shall be the duty 
of the Union Commission to present annually to the President a report as to the 
work done by the Commission and on receipt of such report the President shall 
cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the 
cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the 
reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before each House of Parliament.
(2) It shall be the duty of a State Commission to present annually to the 
Governor 1*** of the State a report as to the work done by the Commission, 
and it shall be the duty of a Joint Commission to present annually to the 
Governor 1*** of each of the States the needs of which are served by the Joint 
Commission a report as to the work done by the Commission in relation to that 
State, and in either case the Governor 2***, shall, on receipt of such report, 
cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the 
cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the 
reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State.
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh, as the case may be" omitted by s. 29 and Sch. ibid.
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

183
1[PART  XIVA
TRIBUNALS
323A. Administrative tribunals.—(1) Parliament may, by law, provide 
for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and 
complaints with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons 
appointed to public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the 
Union or of any State or of any local or other authority within the territory of 
India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation 
owned or controlled by the Government.
(2) A law made under clause (1) may—
(a) provide for the establishment of an administrative tribunal for the 
Union and a separate administrative tribunal for each State or for two or 
more States;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for 
contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said 
tribunals; 
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation 
and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to the disputes or 
complaints referred to in clause (1);
(e) provide for the transfer to each such administrative tribunal of any 
cases pending before any court or other authority immediately before the 
establishment of such tribunal as would have been within the jurisdiction 
of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or 
proceedings are based had arisen after such establishment;
(f) repeal or amend any order made by the President under clause (3) 
of article 371D;
(g) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential 
provisions (including provisions as to fees) as Parliament may deem 
necessary for the effective functioning of, and for the speedy disposal of 
cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such tribunals.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 46 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIVA.—Tribunals)
184
(3) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the 
time being in force.
323B. Tribunals for other matters.—(1) The appropriate Legislature 
may, by law, provide for the adjudication or trial by tribunals of any disputes, 
complaints, or offences with respect to all or any of the matters specified in 
clause (2) with respect to which such Legislature has power to make laws.
(2) The matters referred to in clause (1) are the following, namely:—
(a) levy, assessment, collection and enforcement of any tax;
(b) foreign exchange, import and export across customs frontiers;
(c) industrial and labour disputes;
(d) land reforms by way of acquisition by the State of any estate as 
defined in article 31A or of any rights therein or the extinguishment or 
modification of any such rights or by way of ceiling on agricultural land 
or in any other way; 
(e) ceiling on urban property;
(f) elections to either House of Parliament or the House or either 
House of the Legislature of a State, but excluding the matters referred to 
in article 329 and article 329A;
(g) production, procurement, supply and distribution of food-stuffs 
(including edible oilseeds and oils) and such other goods as the President 
may, by public notification, declare to be essential goods for the purpose 
of this article and control of prices of such goods;
1[(h) rent, its regulation and control and tenancy issues including the 
right, title and interest of landlords and tenants;]
2[(i)] offences against laws with respect to any of the matters 
specified in sub-clauses (a) to 3[(h)] and fees in respect of any of those 
matters;
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth Amendment) Act, 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
2. Sub-clause (h) re-lettered as sub-clause (i) by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for the brackets and letter “(g)” (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIVA.—Tribunals)
185
1[(j)] any matter incidental to any of the matters specified in 
sub-clauses (a) to 2[(i)]. 
(3) A law made under clause (1) may—
(a) provide for the establishment of a hierarchy of tribunals;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for 
contempt) and authority which may be exercised by each of the said 
tribunals;
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation 
and rules of evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court under article 136, with respect to all or any of the matters 
falling within the jurisdiction of the said tribunals; 
(e) provide for the transfer to each such tribunal of any cases pending 
before any court or any other authority immediately before the 
establishment of such tribunal as would have been within the jurisdiction 
of such tribunal if the causes of action on which such suits or 
proceedings are based had arisen after such establishment;
(f) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential 
provisions (including provisions as to fees) as the appropriate 
Legislature may deem necessary for the effective functioning of, and for  
the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, 
such tribunals. 
(4) The provisions of this article shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything in any other provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the 
time being in force.
Explanation.—In this article, “appropriate Legislature”, in relation to any 
matter, means Parliament or, as the case may be, a State Legislature competent 
to make laws with respect to such matter in accordance with the provisions of 
Part XI.]
 
______________________________________________
1. Sub-clause (i) re-lettered as sub-clause (j) by the Constitution (Seventy-fifth 
Amendment) Act, 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid, for “(h)” (w.e.f. 15-5-1994).

186
PART XV
ELECTIONS
324. Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested 
in an Election Commission.—(1) The superintendence, direction and control 
of the preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the conduct of, all elections to 
Parliament and to the Legislature of every State and of elections to the offices 
of President and Vice-President held under this Constitution 1*** shall be 
vested in a Commission (referred to in this Constitution as the Election 
Commission). 
(2) The Election Commission shall consist of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and such number of other Election Commissioners, if any, as the 
President may from time to time fix and the appointment of the Chief Election 
Commissioner and other Election Commissioners shall, subject to the provisions 
of any law made in that behalf by Parliament, be made by the President.
(3) When any other Election Commissioner is so appointed the Chief 
Election Commissioner shall act as the Chairman of the Election Commission.
(4) Before each general election to the House of the People and to the 
Legislative Assembly of each State, and before the first general election and 
thereafter before each biennial election to the Legislative Council of each State 
having such Council, the President may also appoint after consultation with the 
Election Commission such Regional Commissioners as he may consider 
necessary to assist the Election Commission in the performance of the 
functions conferred on the Commission by clause (1).
(5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions 
of service and tenure of office of the Election Commissioners and the Regional 
Commissioners shall be such as the President may by rule determine:
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed 
from his office except in like manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the 
Supreme Court and the conditions of service of the Chief Election 
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment:
______________________________________________
1. The words "including the appointment of  election tribunals for the decision of doubts 
and disputes arising out of or in connection with elections to Parliament and to the 
Legislatures of States" omitted by the Constitution (Nineteenth Amendment) 
Act, 1966, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-12-1966).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XV.—Elections) 
187
Provided further that any other Election Commissioner or a Regional 
Commissioner shall not be removed from office except on the recommendation 
of the Chief Election Commissioner.
(6) The President, or the Governor 1*** of a State, shall, when so 
requested by the Election Commission, make available to the Election 
Commission or to a Regional Commissioner such staff as may be necessary for 
the discharge of the functions conferred on the Election Commission by    
clause (1). 
325. No person to be ineligible for inclusion in, or to claim to be 
included in a special, electoral roll on grounds of religion, race, caste or 
sex.—There shall be one general electoral roll for every territorial constituency 
for election to either House of Parliament or to the House or either House of the 
Legislature of a State and no person shall be ineligible for inclusion in any such 
roll or claim to be included in any special electoral roll for any such 
constituency on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex or any of them.
326. Elections to the House of the People and to the Legislative 
Assemblies of States to be on the basis of adult suffrage.—The elections to 
the House of the People and to the Legislative Assembly of every State shall be 
on the basis of adult suffrage; that is to say, every person who is a citizen of 
India and who is not less than 2[eighteen years] of age on such date as may be 
fixed in that behalf by or under any law made by the appropriate Legislature 
and is not otherwise disqualified under this Constitution or any law made by 
the appropriate Legislature on the ground of non-residence, unsoundness of 
mind, crime or corrupt or illegal practice, shall be entitled to be registered as a 
voter at any such election.  
327. Power of Parliament to make provision with respect to elections 
to Legislatures.—Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament 
may from time to time by law make provision with respect to all matters 
relating to, or in connection with, elections to either House of Parliament or to 
the House or either House of the Legislature of a State including the 
preparation of electoral rolls, the delimitation of constituencies and all other 
matters necessary for securing  the due constitution of such House or Houses.
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-first Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 2, for "twenty-one 
years" (w.e.f. 28-3-1989).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XV.—Elections) 
188
328. Power of Legislature of a State to make provision with respect 
to elections to such Legislature.—Subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution and in so far as provision in that behalf is not made by Parliament, 
the Legislature of a State may from time to time by law make provision with 
respect to all matters relating to, or in  connection with, the elections to the 
House or either House of the Legislature of the State including the preparation 
of electoral rolls and all other matters necessary for securing the due 
constitution of such House or Houses. 
329. Bar to interference by courts in electoral matters.—
1[Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution 2***—]
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of 
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such constituencies, made or 
purporting to be made under article 327 or article 328, shall not be called 
in question in any court;
(b) no election to either House of Parliament or to the House or 
either House of the Legislature of a State shall be called in question 
except by an election petition presented to such authority and in such 
manner as may be provided for by or under any law made by the 
appropriate Legislature.
3329A. [Special provision as to elections to Parliament in the case of 
Prime Minister and Speaker.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth 
Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 36 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3, for certain words 
(w.e.f. 10-8-1975).
2. The words, figures and letter "but subject to the provisions of article 329A" omitted by 
the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 35 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 4 (w.e.f. 10-8-1975).

189
PART  XVI
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN CLASSES
330. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in the House of the People.—(1) Seats shall be reserved in the House of the 
People for — 
(a) the Scheduled Castes;
1[(b) the Scheduled Tribes except the Scheduled Tribes in the 
autonomous districts of Assam; and]
(c) the Scheduled Tribes in the autonomous districts of Assam.
(2) The number of seats reserved in any State 2[or Union territory] for 
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes under clause (1) shall bear, as 
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats allotted to 
that State 2[or Union territory] in the House of the People as the population of 
the Scheduled Castes in the State 2[or Union territory] or of the Scheduled 
Tribes in the State 2[or Union territory] or part of the State 2[or Union territory], 
as the case may be, in respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total 
population of the State 2[or Union territory].
3[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (2), the number of 
seats reserved in the House of the People for the Scheduled Tribes in the 
autonomous districts of Assam shall bear to the total number of seats allotted to 
that State a proportion not less than the population of the Scheduled Tribes in 
the said autonomous districts bears to the total population of the State.]
4[Explanation.—In this article and in article 332, the expression 
“population” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census 
of which the relevant figures have been published:
Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last preceding 
census of which the relevant figures have been published shall, until the 
relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 5[2026] have been 
published, be construed as a reference to the 6[2001] census.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. By the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 2, for sub-clause (b)
(w.e.f. 16-6-1986).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-first Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17-10-1973).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 47 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 6, for "2000" (w.e.f. 21-2-2002). 
6. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-seventh Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5, for "1991" (w.e.f. 22-6-2003).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
190
1[330A. Reservation of seats for women in the House of the People.-
(1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the House of the People.
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved 
under clause (2) of article 330 shall be reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) As nearly as may be, one-third (including the number of seats 
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election to the House 
of the People shall be reserved for women.]
331. Representation of the Anglo-Indian Community in the House of 
the People.—Notwithstanding anything in article 81, the President may, if he is 
of opinion that the Anglo-Indian community is not adequately represented in 
the House of the People, nominate not more than two members of that 
community to the House of the People. 
332. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for 
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, 2[except the Scheduled Tribes 
in the autonomous districts of Assam], in the Legislative Assembly of every 
State 3***.
(2) Seats shall be reserved also for the autonomous districts in the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam.  
(3) The number of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause (1) 
shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats 
in the Assembly as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or of the 
Scheduled Tribes in the State or part of the State, as the case may be, in respect 
of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population of the State.
4[(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the taking 
effect, under article 170, of the re-adjustment, on the basis of the first census 
after the year 5[2026], of the number of seats in the Legislative Assemblies of 
the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland, the seats 
which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly 
of any such State shall be,—
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, s.3 (date yet to be 
notified).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-first Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 3, for certain words (w.e.f. 16-6-1986).
3. The words and letters  "specified in Part A or  Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 21-9-1987).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for "2000" (w.e.f. 21-2-2002).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
191
(a) if all the seats in the Legislative Assembly of such State in 
existence on the date of coming into force of the Constitution (Fifty-
seventh Amendment) Act, 1987 (hereafter in this clause referred to as 
the existing Assembly) are held by members of the Scheduled Tribes, all 
the seats except one;
(b) in any other case, such number of seats as bears to the total 
number of seats, a proportion not less than the number (as on the said 
date) of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the existing 
Assembly bears to the total number of seats in the existing Assembly.]
1[(3B) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), until the 
re-adjustment, under article 170, takes effect on the basis of the first census 
after the year 2[2026], of the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Tripura, the seats which shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in 
the Legislative Assembly shall be, such number of seats as bears to the total 
number of seats, a proportion  not less than the number, as on the date of 
coming into force of the Constitution (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, 
of members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assembly in 
existence on the said date bears to the total number of seats in that Assembly.]
(4) The number of seats reserved for an autonomous district in the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam shall bear to the total number of 
seats in that Assembly a proportion not less than the population of the district 
bears to the total population of the State.
(5) The constituencies for the seats reserved for any autonomous district 
of Assam shall not comprise any area outside that district 3***.
(6) No person who is not a member of a Scheduled Tribe of any 
autonomous district of the State of Assam shall be eligible for election to the 
Legislative Assembly of the State from any constituency of that district 3***:
4[Provided that for elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitition (Seventy-second Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5-12-1992).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-fourth Amendment) Act, 2001, s. 7, for "2000" 
(w.e.f. 21-2-2002).
3. Certain words omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), 
s. 71 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
4. Ins. by the Constitution  (Ninetieth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-9-2003).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
192
Assam, the representation of the Scheduled Tribes and non-Scheduled Tribes in 
the constituencies included in the Bodoland Territorial Areas District, so 
notified, and existing prior to the constitution of Bodoland Territorial Areas 
District, shall be maintained.]
1[332A. Reservation of  seats for women in the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States.— (1) Seats shall be reserved for women in the 
Legislative Assembly of every State.
(2) As nearly as may be, one-third of the total number of seats reserved 
under clause (3) of article 332 shall be reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) As nearly as may be , one-third (including the number of seats 
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Sceduled 
Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the 
Legislative Assembly of every State shall be reserved for women.]
333. Representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States.—Notwithstanding anything in article 
170, the Governor 2*** of a State may, if he is of opinion that the Anglo-Indian 
community needs representation in the Legislative Assembly of the State and is 
not adequately represented therein, 3[nominate one member of that community 
to the Assembly]. 
334. 4[Reservation of seats and special representation to cease after
certain period].—Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this 
Part, the provisions of this Constitution relating to—
(a) the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People and in the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States; and
(b) the representation of the Anglo-Indian community in the 
House of  the People and in the Legislative Assemblies of the States by  
nomination,
______________________________________________
1.Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, s.4 (date yet to be 
notified).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, 
s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-third Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4, for "nominate such 
number of members of the community to the Assembly as he considers appropriate" 
(w.e.f. 23-1-1970).
4. Subs. by the Constitution  (One hundred and fourth Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 2,   for 
marginal heading (w.e.f. 25-1-2020).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
193
shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of 1[eighty years in 
respect of clause (a) and seventy years in respect of clause (b)] from the 
commencement of this Constitution:
Provided that nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the 
House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State until the 
dissolution of the then existing House or Assembly, as the case may be. 
2[334A. Reservation of seats for women take effect. — (1) 
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provision of this Part or Part VIII, 
the provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for women 
in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State and the 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi shall come into 
effect after an exercise of delimitation is undertaken for this purpose after the 
relevant figures for the first census taken after commencement of the 
Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023 have been 
published and shall cease to have effect on the expiration of a period of fifteen 
years from such commencement. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of articles 239AA, 330A and 332A, seats 
reserved for women in the House of the People, the Legislative Assembly of a 
State and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
shall continue till such date as the Parliament may by law determine.
(3) Rotation of seats reserved for women in the House of the People, the 
Legislative Assembly of a State and the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi shall take effect after each subsequent exercise of 
delimitation as the Parliament may by law determine.
(4) Nothing in this article shall affect any representation in the House of 
the People, the Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative Assembly of 
the National Capital Territory of Delhi until the dissolution of the then existing 
House of the People, Legislative Assembly of a State or the Legislative 
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.]
335. Claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to services 
and posts.—The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes shall be taken into consideration, consistently with the 
maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to 
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State:
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fourth Amendment) Act, 2019, s. 2, for 
“seventy years” (w.e.f. 25-1-2020). The words “seventy years” subs. for “sixty years” by 
the  Constitution  (Ninety-fifth Amendment) Act, 2009, s.2 (w.e.f. 25-1-2010). The words
“sixty years” subs. for “fifty years” by the Constitution  (Seventy-ninth Amendment) Act, 
1999, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-1-2000). The words “fifty years” subs. for “forty years” by the 
Constitution (Sixty-second Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20-12-1989).  The words 
“forty years” subs. for “thirty years” by the Constitution  (Forty-fifth Amendment) Act, 
1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-1-1980).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Sixth Amendment) Act, 2023, s.5 (date yet 
to be notified).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
194
1[Provided that nothing in this article shall prevent in making of any 
provision in favour of the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes for relaxation in qualifying marks in any examination or lowering the 
standards of evaluation, for reservation in matters or promotion to any class or 
classes of services or posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State.]
336. Special provision for Anglo-Indian community in certain 
services.—(1) During the first two years after the commencement of this 
Constitution, appointments of members of the Anglo-Indian community to posts 
in the railway, customs, postal and telegraph services of the Union shall be made 
on the same basis as immediately before the fifteenth day of August, 1947. 
During every succeeding period of two years, the number of posts 
reserved for the members of the said community in the said services shall, as 
nearly as possible, be less by ten per cent. than the numbers so reserved during 
the immediately preceding period of two years:
Provided that at the end of ten years from the commencement of this 
Constitution all such reservations shall cease.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall bar the appointment of members of the 
Anglo-Indian community to posts other than, or in addition to, those reserved 
for the community under that clause if such members are found qualified for 
appointment on merit as compared with the members of other communities.
337. Special provision with respect to educational grants for the 
benefit of Anglo-Indian community.—During the first three financial years 
after the commencement of this Constitution, the same grants, if any, shall be 
made by the Union and by each State 2*** for the benefit of the Anglo-Indian 
community in respect of education as were made in the financial year ending 
on the thirty-first day of March, 1948.
During every succeeding period of three years the grants may be less by 
ten per cent. than those for the immediately preceding period of three years:
Provided that at the end of ten years from the commencement of this 
Constitution such grants, to the extent to which they are a special concession to 
the Anglo-Indian community, shall cease:
Provided further that no educational institution shall be entitled to 
receive any grant under this article unless at least forty per cent. of the annual 
admissions therein are made available to members of communities other than 
the Anglo-Indian community.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-second Amendment) Act, 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 8-9-2000).
2. The words and letters  "specified in Part A or  Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by     
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
195
 338. 1[National Commission for Scheduled Castes].—2[3[(1) There 
shall be a Commission for the Scheduled Castes to be known as the National 
Commission for the Scheduled Castes. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by 
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson 
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of 
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be 
such as the President may by rule determine.]
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the 
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards 
provided for the Scheduled Castes 4*** under this Constitution or under 
any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the 
Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the 
deprivation of rights and safeguards of the Scheduled Castes 4***;
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of 
socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes
1*** and to 
evaluate the progress of their development under the Union and any 
State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as the 
Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the measures that 
should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective implementation of 
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution  (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for the marginal 
heading (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2, for cls. (1) and (2) 
(w.e.f. 12-3-1992).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2, for cls. (1) and   
(2) (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
4. The words "and Scheduled Tribes" omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth 
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
196
those safeguards and other measures for the protection, welfare and 
socio-economic development of the Scheduled Castes 1***; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, welfare 
and development and advancement of the Scheduled Castes 1*** as the President 
may, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each 
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with 
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be 
forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the 
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken 
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in 
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of 
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court  trying a suit and in particular in 
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and 
documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the 
Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Castes 1***].
2[(10)] In this article, references to the Scheduled Castes 1*** shall be 
construed as including references 3*** to the Anglo-Indian community.
4[338A. National Commission for Scheduled Tribes.—(1) There shall 
be a Commission for the Scheduled Tribes to be known as the National 
Commission for the Scheduled Tribes.
______________________________________________
1. The words "and Scheduled Tribes" omitted by the Constitution (Eighty-ninth 
Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19-2-2004).
2. Cl. (3) renumbered as cl. (10) by the Constitution (Sixty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1990, 
s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-3-1992).
3. The words, brackets and figures "to such other backward classes as the President may, 
on receipt of the report of a Commission appointed under cl. (1) of article 340, by 
order specify and also" omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second 
Amendment) Act, 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-8-2018).
4. Art 338A  ins. by the Constitution  (Eighty-ninth Amendment)  Act, 2003, s. 3
(w.e.f. 19-2-2004).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
197
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by 
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson 
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of 
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be 
such as the President may by rule determine. 
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of  the 
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal. 
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating  to the 
safeguards provided for the Scheduled Tribes under this Constitution or 
under any other law for the time being in force or under any order of the 
Government and to evaluate the working of such safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the 
deprivation of rights and safeguards of  the Scheduled Tribes; 
(c) to participate and advise on the planning process of 
socio-economic development of the Scheduled Tribes and to evaluate the 
progress of their development under the Union and any State;
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as 
the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those 
safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports recommendations as to the  
measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the 
effective implementation of those safeguards and other measures 
for the protection,  welfare and socio-economic development of the 
Scheduled Tribes; and 
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, 
welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes as 
the President may, subject to the provisions of any law made by 
Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each 
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the 
reasons for the  non-acceptance, if any, of  any such recommendations.
(7) Where any such  report, or  any part thereof, relates to any matter 
with which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be 
forwarded to the Governor of the State who shall cause it to be laid before the 
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken 
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
198
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in 
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of 
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in 
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of  India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; 
(f) any other matter which the President may, by rule,  determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the 
Commission on all major policy matters affecting Scheduled Tribes.]
1[338B. National Commission for Backward Classes.—(1) There shall 
be a Commission for the socially and educationally backward classes to be 
known as the National Commission for Backward Classes.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by 
Parliament, the Commission shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson 
and three other Members and the conditions of service and tenure of office of 
the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members so appointed shall be 
such as the President may by rule determine.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of the 
Commission shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and 
seal.
(4) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own procedure.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Commission—
(a) to investigate and monitor all matters relating to the safeguards 
provided for the socially and educationally backward classes under this 
Constitution or under any other law for the time being in force or under 
any order of the Government and to evaluate the working of such 
safeguards;
(b) to inquire into specific complaints with respect to the 
deprivation of rights and safeguards of the socially and educationally 
backward classes;
(c) to participate and advise on the socio-economic development 
of the socially and educationally backward classes and to evaluate the 
progress of their development under the Union and any State;
______________________________________________
1.Art 338B  ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, 
s. 3 (w.e.f. 15-8-2018).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
199
(d) to present to the President, annually and at such other times as 
the Commission may deem fit, reports upon the working of those 
safeguards;
(e) to make in such reports the recommendations as to the
measures that should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective 
implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the 
protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the socially and 
educationally backward classes; and
(f) to discharge such other functions in relation to the protection, 
welfare and development and advancement of the socially and 
educationally backward classes as the President may, subject to the 
provisions of any law made by Parliament, by rule specify.
(6) The President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each 
House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any such recommendations.
(7) Where any such report, or any part thereof, relates to any matter with 
which any State Government is concerned, a copy of such report shall be 
forwarded to the State Government which shall cause it to be laid before the 
Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the action taken 
or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the 
reasons for the non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.
(8) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred to in 
sub-clause (a) or inquiring into any complaint referred to in sub-clause (b) of 
clause (5), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular in 
respect of the following matters, namely :—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and 
documents;
(f) any other matter which the President may by rule, determine.
(9) The Union and every State Government shall consult the 
Commission on all major policy matters affecting the socially and 
educationally backward classes:]

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
200
1[Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply for the purposes of 
clause (3) of article 342A.] 
339. Control of the Union over the administration of Scheduled 
Areas and the welfare of Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President may at any 
time and shall, at the expiration of ten years from the commencement of this 
Constitution by order appoint a Commission to report on the administration of 
the Scheduled Areas and the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the States 2***.
The order may define the composition, powers and procedure of the 
Commission and may contain such incidental or ancillary provisions as the 
President may consider necessary or desirable.
(2) The executive power of the Union shall extend to the giving of 
directions to 3[a State] as to the drawing up and execution of schemes specified 
in the direction to be essential for the welfare of the Scheduled Tribes in the 
State.
340. Appointment of a Commission to investigate the conditions of 
backward classes.—(1) The President may by order appoint a Commission 
consisting of such persons as he thinks fit to investigate the conditions of 
socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of India and the 
difficulties under which they labour and to make recommendations as to the 
steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove such difficulties 
and to improve their condition and as to the grants that  should be made for the 
purpose by the Union or any State and the conditions subject to which such 
grants should be made, and the order appointing such Commission shall define 
the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
(2) A Commission so appointed shall investigate the matters referred to 
them and present to the President a report setting out the facts as found by them 
and making such recommendations as they think proper.
(3) The President shall cause a copy of the report so presented together 
with a memorandum explaining the action taken thereon to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.
341. Scheduled Castes.—(1) The President 4[may with respect to any 
State 5[or Union territory], and where it is a State 2***, after consultation with 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 15-9-2021).
2. The words and letters  for "specified in Part A or  Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch. ibid. for "any such State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 10, for "may, after 
consultation with the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State" (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
201
the Governor 1*** thereof], by public notification2, specify the castes, races or 
tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which shall for the 
purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to 
that State  3[or Union territory, as the case may be.]
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of 
Scheduled Castes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any caste, 
race or tribe or part of or group within any caste, race or tribe, but save as 
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any 
subsequent notification.
342. Scheduled Tribes.—(1) The President 4[may with respect to any 
State 3[or Union territory], and where it is a State 45***, after consultation with 
the Governor 31*** thereof], by public notification6,5 specify the tribes or tribal 
communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which 
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in 
relation to that State 3[or Union territory, as the case may be.]
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of 
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause (1) any tribe or 
tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal community, but 
save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied 
by any subsequent notification.
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. See the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 19), the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 (C.O. 32), the Constitution 
(Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order, 1956 (C.O. 52), the Constitution 
(Dadra and Nagar Haveli) (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1962 (C.O. 64), the Constitution 
(Pondicherry)  Scheduled Castes Order, 1964 (C.O. 68), the Constitution (Goa, Daman 
and Diu) Scheduled Castes Order, 1968 (C.O. 81) and the Constitution (Sikkim) 
Scheduled Castes Order, 1978 (C.O. 110).
3. Ins. by the Constitutiton (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.               
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 11, for "may, after 
consultation with the Governor or Rajpramukh of State" (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
5. Certain words Omitted by the constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and 
Sch., ibid, (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).  
6. See the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 (C.O. 22), the Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) (Union Territories) Order, 1951 (C.O. 33), the Constitution 
(Andaman and Nicobar Islands) (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1959 (C.O. 58), the 
Constitution (Dadra and Nagar Haveli) (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1962 (C.O. 65), the 
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1967 (C.O. 78), the 
Constitution (Goa, Daman and Diu) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1968 (C.O. 82), the 
Constitution (Nagaland) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1970 (C.O. 88) the Constitution 
(Sikkim) Scheduled Tribes Order, 1978 (C.O. 111).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVI.—Special Provisions Relating to Certain Classes) 
202
1[342A. Socially and educationally backward classes.—(1) The 
President may with respect to any State or Union territory, and where it is a 
State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by public notification, 
specify 2[the socially and educationally backward classes in the Central List 
which shall for the purposes of  the Central Government] be deemed to be 
socially and educationally backward classes in relation to that State or Union 
territory, as the case may be. 
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the Central List of 
socially and educationally backward classes specified in a notification issued 
under clause (1) any socially and educationally backward class, but save as 
aforesaid a notification issued under the said clause shall not be varied by any 
subsequent notification.]  
3[Explanation.—For the purposes of clauses (1) and (2), the expression 
“Central List” means the list of socially and educationally  backward classes 
prepared and maintained by and for the Central Government.
(3) Notwithstanding any contained in clauses (1) and (2), every State or 
Union territory may, by law, prepare and maintain, for its own purposes, a list 
of socially and educationally backward classes, entries in which may be 
different from the Central List.]
______________________________________________
1. Art 342 A ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Second Amendment) Act, 2018, 
s. 4
(w.e.f. 15-8-2018).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021, s. 3
for 
socially and educationally backward classes which shall for the purposes of the 
Constitution (w.e.f. 15-9-2021).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021, s. 3
(w.e.f. 15-9-2021).

 
203
PART XVII
OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
CHAPTER I.—LANGUAGE OF THE UNION
343. Official language of the Union.—(1) The official language of the 
Union shall be Hindi in Devanagari script.
The form of numerals to be used for the official purposes of the Union 
shall be the international form of Indian numerals.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (1), for a period of fifteen years 
from the commencement of this Constitution, the English language shall 
continue to be used for all the official purposes of the Union for which it was 
being used immediately before such commencement: 
Provided that the President may, during the said period, by order1
authorise the use of the Hindi language in addition to the English language and 
of the Devanagari form of numerals in addition to the international form of 
Indian numerals for any of the official purposes of the Union.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in this article, Parliament may by law 
provide for the use, after the said period of fifteen years, of—
(a) the English language; or
(b) the Devanagari form of numerals,
for such purposes as may be specified in the law.
344. Commission and Committee of Parliament on official 
language.—(1) The President shall, at the expiration of five years from the 
commencement of this Constitution and thereafter at the expiration of ten years 
from such commencement, by order constitute a Commission which shall 
consist of a Chairman and such other members representing the different 
languages specified in the Eighth Schedule as the President may appoint, and 
the order shall define the procedure to be followed by the Commission.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Commission to make recommendations to 
the President as to—
(a) the progressive use of the Hindi language for the official 
purposes of the Union;
(b) restrictions on the use of the English language for all or any of 
the official purposes of the Union;
(c) the language to be used for all or any of the purposes 
mentioned in article 348;
______________________________________________
1. See C.O. 41.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVII—LANGUAGE)
204
(d) the form of numerals to be used for any one or more specified 
purposes of the Union;
(e) any other matter referred to the Commission by the President 
as regards the official language of the Union and the language for 
communication between the Union and a State or between one State and 
another and their use.
(3) In making their recommendations under clause (2), the Commission 
shall have due regard to the industrial, cultural and scientific advancement of 
India, and the just claims and the interests of persons belonging to the      
non-Hindi speaking areas in regard to the public services.
(4) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting of thirty members, 
of whom twenty shall be members of the House of the People and ten shall be 
members of the Council of States to be elected respectively by the members of 
the House of the People and the members of the Council of States in 
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the 
single transferable vote.
(5) It shall be the duty of the Committee to examine the 
recommendations of the Commission constituted under clause (1) and to report 
to the President their opinion thereon.
(6) Notwithstanding anything in article 343, the President may, after 
consideration of the report referred to in clause (5), issue directions in 
accordance with the whole or any part of that report.
CHAPTER II.—REGIONAL LANGUAGES
345. Official language or languages of a State.—Subject to the 
provisions of articles 346 and 347, the Legislature of a State may by law adopt 
any one or more of the languages in use in the State or Hindi as the language or 
languages to be used for all or any of the official purposes of that State:
Provided that, until the Legislature of the State otherwise provides by 
law, the English language shall continue to be used for those official purposes 
within the State for which it was being used immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution.
346. Official language for communication between one State and 
another or between a State and the Union.—The language for the time being 
authorised for use in the Union for official purposes shall be the official 
language for communication between one State and another State and between 
a State and the Union:

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVII—LANGUAGE)
205
Provided that if two or more States agree that the Hindi language should 
be the official language for communication between such States, that language 
may be used for such communication. 
347. Special provision relating to language spoken by a section of the 
population of a State.—On a demand being made in that behalf the President 
may, if he is satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of a State 
desire the use of any language spoken by them to be recognised by that State, 
direct that such language shall also be officially recognised throughout that 
State or any part thereof for such purpose as he may specify.
CHAPTER III.—LANGUAGE OF THE SUPREME COURT,
HIGH COURTS, ETC.
348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High 
Courts and for Acts, Bills, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the 
foregoing provisions of this Part, until Parliament by law otherwise provides—
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court;
(b) the authoritative texts—
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be 
moved in either House of Parliament or in the House or either 
House of the Legislature of a State;
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a 
State and of all Ordinances promulgated by the President or the 
Governor 1*** of a State; and
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued 
under this Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or 
the Legislature of a State,
shall be in the English language.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (a) of clause (1), the 
Governor
1*** of a State may, with the previous consent of the President, 
authorise the use of the Hindi language, or any other language used for any 
official purposes of the State, in proceedings in the High Court having its 
principal seat in that State:
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVII—LANGUAGE)
206
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any judgment, decree 
or order passed or made by such High Court. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub-clause (b) of clause (1), where the 
Legislature of a State has prescribed any language other than the English 
language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislature of the 
State or in Ordinances promulgated by the Governor 1*** of the State or in any 
order, rule, regulation or bye-law referred to in paragraph (iii) of that sub-clause, 
a translation of the same in the English language published under the authority of 
the Governor 1*** of the State in the Official Gazette of that State shall be 
deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the English language under this 
article.
349. Special procedure for enactment of certain laws relating to 
language.—During the period of fifteen years from the commencement of this 
Constitution, no Bill or amendment making provision for the language to be 
used for any of the purposes mentioned in clause (1) of article 348 shall be 
introduced or moved in either House of Parliament without the previous 
sanction of the President, and the President shall not give his sanction to the 
introduction of any such Bill or the moving of any such amendment except 
after he has taken into consideration the recommendations of the Commission 
constituted under clause (1) of article 344 and the report of the Committee 
constituted under clause (4) of that article.
CHAPTER IV.—SPECIAL DIRECTIVES
350. Language to be used in representations for redress of 
grievances.—Every person shall be entitled to submit a representation for the 
redress of any grievance to any officer or authority of the Union or a State in 
any of the languages used in the Union or in the State, as the case may be.
2[350A. Facilities for instruction in mother-tongue at primary 
stage.—It shall be the endeavour of every State and of every local authority 
within the State to provide adequate facilities for instruction in the 
mother-tongue at the primary stage of education to children belonging to 
linguistic minority groups; and the President may issue such directions to any 
State as he considers necessary or proper for securing the provision of such 
facilities. 
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Arts. 350A and 350B ins. by s.21., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVII—LANGUAGE)
207
350B. Special Officer for linguistic minorities.—(1) There shall be a 
Special Officer for linguistic minorities to be appointed by the President. 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer to investigate all matters relating 
to the safeguards provided for linguistic minorities under this Constitution and 
report to the President upon those matters at such intervals as the President may 
direct, and the President shall cause all such reports to be laid before each House of 
Parliament, and sent to the Governments of the States concerned.]
351. Directive for development of the Hindi language.—It shall be the 
duty of the Union to promote the spread of the Hindi language, to develop it so 
that it may serve as a medium of expression for all the elements of the 
composite culture of India and to secure its enrichment by assimilating without 
interfering with its genius, the forms, style and expressions used in Hindustani 
and in the other languages of India specified in the Eighth Schedule, and by 
drawing, wherever necessary or desirable, for its vocabulary, primarily on 
Sanskrit and secondarily on other languages. 
 
 

 
208
PART XVIII
EMERGENCY PROVISIONS 
352. Proclamation of Emergency.—(1) If the President is satisfied that 
a grave emergency exists whereby the security of India or of any part of the 
territory thereof is threatened, whether by war or external aggression or 1[armed 
rebellion], he may, by Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect 2[in 
respect of the whole of India or of such part of the territory thereof as may be 
specified in the Proclamation.] 
3[Explanation.—A Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the 
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by 
external aggression or by armed rebellion may be made before the actual 
occurrence of war or of any such aggression or rebellion, if the President is 
satisfied that there is imminent danger thereof.] 
4[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1) may be varied or revoked 
by a subsequent Proclamation.
(3) The President shall not issue a Proclamation under clause (1) or a 
Proclamation varying such Proclamation unless the decision of the Union 
Cabinet (that is to say, the Council consisting of the Prime Minister and other 
Ministers of Cabinet rank appointed under article 75) that such a Proclamation 
may be issued has been communicated to him in writing.
(4) Every Proclamation issued under this article shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament and shall, except where it is a Proclamation revoking a 
previous Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of one month unless 
before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both 
Houses of Parliament:
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37, for "internal 
disturbance" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 48 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Ins.  by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
4. Subs. by s. 37, ibid., for cls. (2), (2A) and (3) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
209
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation 
revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when the House of the 
People has been dissolved, or the dissolution of the House of the People takes 
place during the period of one month referred to in this clause, and if a 
resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of 
States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation  has been passed by 
the House of the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation  
shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the 
House of the People first sits after its reconstitution, unless before the 
expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the 
Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.
(5) A Proclamation  so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate 
on the expiration of a period of six months from the date of the passing of the 
second of the resolutions approving the Proclamation  under clause (4): 
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in 
force of such a Proclamation is passed by both Houses of Parliament the 
Proclamation shall, unless revoked, continue in force for a further period of six 
months from the date on which it would otherwise have ceased to operate under 
this clause:
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes 
place during any such period of six months and a resolution approving the 
continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council of 
States but no resolution with respect to the continuance in force of such 
Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People during the said 
period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days 
from the date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution 
unless before the expiration of the said period  of thirty days, a resolution 
approving the continuance in force  of the Proclamation  has been also passed 
by the House of the People.
(6) For the purposes of clauses (4) and (5), a resolution may be passed 
by either House of Parliament only by a majority of the total membership of 
that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the Members of that 
House present and voting.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing clauses, the 
President shall revoke a Proclamation issued under clause (1) or a Proclamation 
varying such Proclamation if the House of the People passes a resolution 
disapproving, or, as the case may be, disapproving the continuance in force  of, 
such Proclamation.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
210
(8) Where a notice in writing signed by not less than one-tenth of the 
total number of members of the House of the People  has been given, of their 
intention to move a resolution for disapproving, or, as the case may be, for 
disapproving the continuance in force of, a Proclamation  issued under 
clause (1) or a Proclamation  varying such Proclamation,—
(a) to the Speaker, if the House is in session; or
(b) to the President, if the House  is not in session,
a special sitting of the House shall be held within fourteen days from the date 
on which such notice is received by the Speaker, or, as the case may be, by the 
President, for the purpose  of considering such resolution.]
1[(9) The power conferred on the President by this article shall include 
the power  to issue different  Proclamations  on different grounds, being war or 
external aggression or 2[armed rebellion] or imminent danger of war or external 
aggression or 2[armed rebellion], whether or not there is a Proclamation  
already issued by the President under clause (1) and such Proclamation  is in 
operation.
1* * 
* 
* 
*
*
*
*
353. Effect of Proclamation of Emergency.—While a Proclamation 
of Emergency is in operation, then—
(a) notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the executive 
power  of the Union shall extend to the giving of directions to any State 
as to the manner in which the executive power  thereof is to be 
exercised;
(b) the power  of Parliament to make laws with respect to any 
matter shall include power to make laws conferring powers and 
imposing  duties, or authorising the conferring of powers and the 
imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and authorities of the 
Union as respects that matter, notwithstanding that it is one which is not 
enumerated in the Union List:
______________________________________________
1. Cls. (4) and (5) ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 (with 
retrospective effect) and subsequently cl. (4) renumbered as cl. (9) and cl. (5) omitted by 
the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 37 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by s. 37, ibid. for  "internal disturbance" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
211
1[Provided that where a Proclamation  of Emergency is in operation only 
in any part of the territory of India,—
(i) the executive power of the Union to give directions under 
clause (a), and 
(ii) the  power  of Parliament to make laws  under clause (b),
shall also extend to any State other than  a State in which or in any part of 
which the Proclamation  of Emergency is in operation if and in so far as the 
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in 
or in relation to the part  of the territory of India in which the Proclamation  of 
Emergency is in operation.] 
354. Application of provisions relating to distribution of revenues 
while a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation.—(1) The President  
may, while a Proclamation  of Emergency is in operation, by order  direct that 
all or any of the provisions of articles 268 to 279 shall for such period, not 
extending in any case beyond the expiration of the financial year in which such 
Proclamation  ceases  to operate, as may be specified in the order, have effect 
subject  to such exceptions or modifications as he thinks fit.
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
355. Duty of the Union to protect States against external aggression 
and internal disturbance.—It shall be the duty of the Union to protect every 
State  against external aggression and internal disturbance and to ensure that the 
Government of every State  is carried on in accordance with the provisions of 
this Constitution.
356. Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in 
States.—(1) If the President, on receipt of a report from the Governor 2*** of a 
State or otherwise, is satisfied that a situation has arisen in which the 
Government of the State cannot be carried  on  in accordance with the 
provisions of this Constitution, the President may by Proclamation—
______________________________________________
1. Added by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 49 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
212
(a) assume to himself all or any of the functions of the 
Government of the State and all or any of the powers vested in or 
exercisable by the Governor 1*** or any body or authority in the State  
other than the Legislature of the State; 
(b) declare that the powers of the Legislature of the State shall be 
exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament;
(c) make such incidental and consequential provisions as appear 
to the President to be necessary or desirable for giving effect to the 
objects of the Proclamation,  including provisions for suspending in 
whole or in part the operation of any provisions of this  Constitution 
relating to any body or authority in the State:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall authorise the President to 
assume to himself any of the powers vested in or exercisable by a High Court, 
or to suspend in whole or in part the operation of any provision of this 
Constitution relating to High Courts.
(2) Any such Proclamation may be revoked or varied by a subsequent 
Proclamation.
(3) Every Proclamation under this article shall be laid before each House 
of Parliament and shall, except where it is a Proclamation revoking a previous 
Proclamation, cease to operate at the expiration of two months unless before 
the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions of both Houses 
of Parliament:
Provided that if any such Proclamation (not being a Proclamation 
revoking a previous Proclamation) is issued at a time when the House of the 
People is dissolved or the dissolution of the House  of the People takes place 
during the period of two months referred to in this clause, and if a resolution 
approving the Proclamation has been passed by the Council of States, but no  
resolution with respect to such Proclamation has been passed by the House of 
the People before the expiration of that period, the Proclamation shall cease to 
operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the House of the 
People first sits after its reconstitution unless before the expiration of the said 
period of thirty days a resolution approving the Proclamation has been also 
passed by the House of the People.
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh, as the case may be" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
213
(4) A Proclamation so approved shall, unless revoked, cease to operate 
on the expiration of a period of 1[six months from the date of issue of the 
Proclamation]:
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the continuance in 
force of such a Proclamation is passed  by both Houses of Parliament, the 
Proclamation shall, unless  revoked, continue in force for a further period of
2[six months] from the date on  which under this clause it would otherwise have 
ceased to  operate, but no such Proclamation shall  in any case remain in force  
for more than three  years:
Provided further that if the dissolution of the House of the People takes 
place during any such period of 2[six months] and a resolution approving the 
continuance in force of such Proclamation has been passed by the Council of 
States, but no resolution with respect to the continuance  in force of such 
Proclamation has been passed by the House of the People during the said 
period, the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days 
from the date on which the House of the  People first sits after its reconstitution 
unless before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution 
approving the continuance in force of the Proclamation  has been also passed 
by the House of the People:
3[Provided also that in the case of the Proclamation issued under 
clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State  of Punjab, the 
reference in the first  proviso to this clause to “three years” shall be construed 
as a reference to 4[five years].]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 50, for "six months" 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-fourth Amendment)  Act, 
1978, s. 38,  for "one year from the date of the passing of the second of the resolutions 
approving the Proclamation under clause (3)" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Subs. by s. 50, ibid., for "six months" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by s. 38, ibid., 
for "one year",  respectively (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-4-1990).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1990, s. 2 (w.e.f. 4-10-1990) 
and further subs. by the Constitution (Sixty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1991, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 12-3-1991).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
214
1[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), a resolution with 
respect to the continuance in force of a Proclamation approved under clause (3) 
for any period beyond the expiration of one year from the date of issue of such 
Proclamation shall not be passed by either House of Parliament unless— 
(a) a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, in the whole of 
India or, as the case may be, in the whole or any part of the State, at the 
time of the passing of such resolution, and
(b) the Election Commission certifies that the continuance in force 
of the Proclamation approved under clause (3) during the period 
specified in such resolution is necessary on account of difficulties in 
holding general elections to the Legislative Assembly of the State 
concerned:]
2[Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the Proclamation 
issued under clause (1) on the 11th day of May, 1987 with respect to the State 
of Punjab.]
357. Exercise of legislative powers under Proclamation issued under 
article 356.—(1) Where by a Proclamation issued under clause (1) of 
article 356, it has been declared that the powers of the Legislature of the State 
shall be exercisable by or under the authority of Parliament, it shall be 
competent—
(a) for Parliament to confer on the President the power of the 
Legislature of the State to make laws, and to authorise the President to 
delegate, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, the 
power so conferred to any other authority to be specified by him in that 
behalf;
(b) for Parliament, or for the President or other authority in whom 
such power to make laws is vested under sub-clause (a), to make laws 
conferring powers and imposing duties, or authorising the conferring of 
powers and the imposition of duties, upon the Union or officers and 
authorities thereof;
(c) for the President to authorise when the House of the People is 
not in session expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State 
pending the sanction of such expenditure by Parliament.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 6 (with retrospective 
effect) and subsequently subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1978, s. 38, for cl. (5) (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Proviso omitted by the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 6-1-1990) and subsequently ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1990, s. 2  (w.e.f. 16-4-1990).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
215
1[(2) Any law made in exercise of the power of the Legislature of the 
State by Parliament or the President or other authority referred to in 
sub-clause (a) of clause (1) which Parliament or the President or such other 
authority would not, but for the issue of a Proclamation under article 356, have 
been competent to make shall, after the Proclamation has ceased to operate, 
continue in force until altered or repealed or amended by a competent 
Legislature or other authority.]
358. Suspension of provisions of article 19 during emergencies.—
2[(1)] 3[While a Proclamation of Emergency declaring that the security of India 
or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by war or by external 
aggression is in operation], nothing in article 19 shall restrict the power of the 
State as defined in Part III to make any law or to take any executive action 
which the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be 
competent to make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the 
incompetency, cease to have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to 
operate, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so 
ceases to have effect:
4[Provided that 5[where such Proclamation of Emergency] is in operation 
only in any part of the territory of India, any such law may be made, or any 
such executive action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any 
State or Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of 
Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any 
part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part 
of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in 
operation.]
6[(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall apply—
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 51 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Art. 358 re-numbered as cl. (1)  by the Constitution  (Forty-fourth Amendment)  
Act, 1978, s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
3. Subs. by s. 39, ibid, for "While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation"                   
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
4. Added by the Constitution  (Forty-second
Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 52
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5. Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-fourth Amendment)  Act, 1978, s. 39, for "where a 
Proclamation of Emergency" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
6. Ins. by s. 39, ibid. (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
216
(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that 
such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation 
when it is made; or
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law 
containing such a recital.]
359. Suspension of the enforcement of the rights conferred by 
Part III during emergencies.—(1) Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in 
operation, the President may by order declare that the right to move any court 
for the enforcement of such of 1[the rights conferred by Part III (except articles 
20 and 21)] as may be mentioned in the order and all proceedings pending in 
any court for the enforcement of the rights so mentioned shall remain 
suspended for the period during which the Proclamation is in force or for such 
shorter period as may be specified in the order.
2[(1A) While an order made under clause (1) mentioning any of  1[the 
rights conferred by Part III (except articles 20 and 21)] is in operation, nothing 
in that Part conferring those rights shall restrict the power of the State as 
defined in the said Part to make any law or to take any executive action which 
the State would but for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to 
make or to take, but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, 
cease to have effect as soon as the order aforesaid ceases to operate, except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have 
effect:]
3[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only 
in any part of the territory of India, any such law may be made, or any such 
executive action may be taken, under this article in relation to or in any State or 
Union territory in which or in any part of which the Proclamation of 
Emergency is not in operation, if and in so far as the security of India or any 
part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in or in relation to the part 
of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of Emergency is in 
operation.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-fourth Amendment)  Act, 1978, s. 40, for "the rights 
conferred by Part III" (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 7 (with retrospective 
effect).
3. Added by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 53 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
217
1[(1B) Nothing in clause (1A) shall apply—
(a) to any law which does not contain a recital to the effect that 
such law is in relation to the Proclamation of Emergency in operation 
when it is made; or
(b) to any executive action taken otherwise than under a law 
containing such a recital.]
(2) An order made as aforesaid may extend to the whole or any part of 
the territory of India:
2[Provided that where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation only 
in a part of the territory of India, any such order shall not extend to any other 
part of the territory of India unless the President, being satisfied that the 
security of India or any part of the territory thereof is threatened by activities in 
or in relation to the part of the territory of India in which the Proclamation of 
Emergency is in operation, considers such extension to be necessary.] 
(3) Every order made under clause (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
3359A. [Application of this Part to the State of Punjab.].—Omitted by 
the Constitution (Sixty-third Amendment) Act, 1989, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-1-1990).
360. Provisions as to financial emergency.—(1) If the President is 
satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the financial stability or credit of 
India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, he may by a 
Proclamation make a declaration to that effect.
4[(2) A Proclamation issued under clause (1)—
(a) may be revoked or varied by a subsequent Proclamation;
(b) shall be laid before each House of Parliament;
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-fourth Amendment)  Act, 1978, s. 40 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Added by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 53 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1988, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-3-1988)  
and ceased to operate on the expiry of a period of two years from the commencement 
of that Act, i.e. 30th day of March, 1988.
4. Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-fourth Amendment)  Act, 1978, s. 41, for cl. (2)
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XVIII.—EMERGENCY PROVISIONS)
218
(c) shall cease to operate at the expiration of two months, unless 
before the expiration of that period it has been approved by resolutions 
of both Houses of Parliament:
Provided that if any such Proclamation is issued at a time when the 
House of the People has been dissolved or the dissolution of the House of the 
People takes place during
the
period of
two months referred to in 
sub-clause (c), and if a resolution approving the Proclamation has been passed 
by the Council of States, but no resolution with respect to such Proclamation 
has been passed by the House of the People before the expiration of that period, 
the Proclamation shall cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the 
date on which the House of the People first sits after its reconstitution unless 
before the expiration of the said period of thirty days a resolution approving the 
Proclamation has been also passed by the House of the People.]
(3) During the
period
any such
Proclamation as is mentioned in 
clause (1) is in operation, the executive authority of the Union shall extend to 
the giving of directions to any State to observe such canons of financial 
propriety as may be specified in the directions, and to the giving of such other 
directions as the President may deem necessary and adequate for the purpose.
(4) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution—
(a) any such direction may include—
(i) a provision requiring the reduction of salaries and allowances 
of all or any class of persons serving in connection with the affairs of 
a State; 
(ii) a provision requiring all Money Bills or other Bills to which 
the provisions of article 207 apply to be reserved for the 
consideration of the President after they are passed by the Legislature 
of the State;
(b) it shall be competent for the President during the period any 
Proclamation issued under this article is in operation to issue directions 
for the reduction of salaries and allowances of all or any class of persons 
serving in connection with the affairs of the Union including the Judges 
of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
1[(5) 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*]
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 8 (with retrospective 
effect) and omitted by the Constitution  (Forty-fourth Amendment)  Act, 1978, s. 41
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

219
PART XIX
MISCELLANEOUS
361. Protection of President and Governors and Rajpramukhs.—(1) 
The President, or the Governor or Rajpramukh of a State, shall not be 
answerable to any court for the exercise and performance of the powers and 
duties of his office or for any act done or purporting to be done by him in the 
exercise and performance of those powers and duties: 
Provided that the conduct of the President may be brought under review 
by any court, tribunal or body appointed or designated by either House of 
Parliament for the investigation of a charge under article 61:
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall be construed as 
restricting the right of any person to bring appropriate proceedings against the 
Government of India or the Government of a State.
(2) No criminal proceedings whatsoever shall be instituted or continued 
against the President, or the Governor 1*** of a State, in any court during his 
term of office.
(3) No process for the arrest or imprisonment of the President, or the 
Governor 1*** of a State, shall issue from any court during his term of office.
(4) No civil proceedings in which relief is claimed against the President, 
or the Governor 1*** of a State, shall be instituted during his term of office in 
any court in respect of any act done or purporting to be done by him in his 
personal capacity, whether before or after he entered upon his office as 
President, or as Governor 1*** of such State, until the expiration of two months 
next after notice in writing has been delivered to the President or the Governor
1***, as the case may be, or left at his office stating the nature of the 
proceedings, the cause of action therefor, the name, description and place of 
residence of the party by whom such proceedings are to be instituted and the 
relief which he claims.
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
220
1[361A. Protection of publication of proceedings of Parliament and 
State Legislatures.—(1) No person shall be liable to any proceedings, civil or 
criminal, in any court in respect of the publication in a newspaper of a 
substantially true report of any proceedings of either House of Parliament or the 
Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature, 
of a State, unless the publication is proved to have been made with malice:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the publication of any 
report of the proceedings of a secret sitting of either House of Parliament or the 
Legislative Assembly, or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature, 
of a State.
(2) Clause (1) shall apply in relation to reports or matters broadcast by 
means of wireless telegraphy as part of any programme or service provided by 
means of a broadcasting station as it applies in relation to reports or matters 
published in a newspaper.
Explanation.—In this article, “newspaper” includes a news agency report 
containing material for publication in a newspaper.]
2[361B. Disqualification for appointment on remunerative political 
post.—A member of a House belonging to any political party who is 
disqualified for being a member of the House under paragraph 2 of the Tenth 
Schedule shall also be disqualified to hold any remunerative political post for 
duration of the period commencing from  the date of his disqualification  till the 
date on which the term of his office as such member would expire or till the  
date on which he contests an election to a House and is declared  elected, 
whichever is earlier.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this article,—
(a)
the expression
“House”
has
the meaning assigned to it in 
clause (a) of paragraph 1 of the  Tenth Schedule;  
(b) the expression “remunerative political post” means any office—                 
(i) under  the Government of India or the Government of a 
State where the salary or remuneration   for  such office is paid 
out of the public revenue of the Government of India or the 
Government of the State, as the case may be; or  
______________________________________________
1.  Art. 361A ins.  by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 42
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
2. Art. 361B ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4 
(w.e.f. 1-1-2004).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
221
(ii) under a body, whether incorporated or not, which is 
wholly or partially owned by the Government of India or the 
Government of State, and the salary or remuneration for such 
office is paid by such body, 
except where such salary or remuneration paid is compensatory in nature.] 
362. [Rights and privileges of Rulers of Indian States.].—Omitted by the 
Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-12-1971).
363. Bar to interference by courts in disputes arising out of certain 
treaties, agreements, etc.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution 
but subject to the provisions of article 143, neither the Supreme Court nor any 
other court shall have jurisdiction in any dispute arising out of any provision of 
a treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument 
which was entered into or executed before the commencement of this 
Constitution by any Ruler of an Indian State and to which the Government of 
the Dominion of India or any of its predecessor Governments was a party and 
which has or has been continued in operation after such commencement, or in 
any dispute in respect of any right accruing under or any liability or obligation 
arising out of any of the provisions of this Constitution relating to any such 
treaty, agreement, covenant, engagement, sanad or other similar instrument.
(2) In this article—
(a) “Indian State” means any territory recognised before the 
commencement of this Constitution by His Majesty or the Government 
of the Dominion of India as being such a State; and
(b) “Ruler” includes the Prince, Chief or other person recognised 
before such commencement by His Majesty or the Government of the 
Dominion of India as the Ruler of any Indian State.
1[363A. Recognition granted to Rulers of Indian States to cease and 
privy purses to be abolished.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution 
or in any law for the time being in force—
(a) the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any time before 
the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) 
Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler of an Indian 
State or any person who, at any time before such commencement, was 
recognised by the President as the successor of such ruler shall, on and 
from such commencement, cease to be recognised as such Ruler or the 
successor of such Ruler;
______________________________________________
1. Art. 363A ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 
(w.e.f. 28-12-1971).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
222
(b) on and from the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-
sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, privy purse is abolished and all rights, 
liabilities and obligations in respect of privy purse are extinguished and 
accordingly the Ruler or, as the case may be, the successor of such 
Ruler, referred to in clause (a) or any other person shall not be paid any 
sum as privy purse.]
364. Special provisions as to major ports and aerodromes.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by public 
notification direct that as from such date as may be specified in the 
notification— 
(a) any law made by Parliament or by the Legislature of a State 
shall not apply to any major port or aerodrome or shall apply thereto 
subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be specified in the 
notification; or 
(b) any existing law shall cease to have effect in any major port or 
aerodrome except as respects things done or omitted to be done before 
the said date, or shall in its application to such port or aerodrome have 
effect subject to such exceptions or modifications as may be specified in 
the notification.
(2) In this article—
(a) “major port” means a port declared to be a major port by or 
under any law made by Parliament or any existing law and includes all 
areas for the time being included within the limits of such port;
(b) “aerodrome” means aerodrome as defined for the purposes of 
the enactments relating to airways, aircraft and air navigation.
365. Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions 
given by the Union.—Where any State has failed to comply with, or to give 
effect to, any directions given in the exercise of the executive power of the Union 
under any of the provisions of this Constitution, it shall be lawful for the 
President to hold that a situation has arisen in which the Government of the State 
cannot be carried on in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
366. Definitions.—In this Constitution, unless the context otherwise 
requires, the following expressions have the meanings hereby respectively 
assigned to them, that is to say—
(1) “agricultural income” means agricultural income as defined 
for the purposes of the enactments relating to Indian income-tax;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
223
(2) “an Anglo-Indian” means a person whose father or any of 
whose other male progenitors in the male line is or was of European 
descent but who is domiciled within the territory of India and is or was 
born within such territory of parents habitually resident therein and not 
established there for temporary purposes only;
(3) “article” means an article of this Constitution; 
(4) “borrow” includes the raising of money by the grant of 
annuities, and “loan” shall be construed accordingly;
1[(4A)*                        *
*                         *] 
(5) “clause” means a clause of the article in which the expression 
occurs;
(6) “corporation tax” means any tax on income, so far as that tax 
is payable by companies and is a tax in the case of which the following 
conditions are fulfilled:—
(a) that it is not chargeable in respect of agricultural 
income; 
(b) that no deduction in respect of the tax paid by 
companies is, by any enactments which may apply to the tax, 
authorised to be made from dividends payable by the companies 
to individuals;
(c) that no provision exists for taking the tax so paid into 
account in computing for the purposes of Indian income-tax the 
total income of individuals receiving such dividends, or in 
computing the Indian income-tax payable by, or refundable to, 
such individuals;
(7) “corresponding Province”, “corresponding Indian State” or 
“corresponding State” means in cases of doubt such Province, Indian 
State or State as may be determined by the President to be the 
corresponding Province, the corresponding Indian State or the 
corresponding State, as the case may be, for the particular purpose in 
question;
______________________________________________
1. Cl. (4A) was ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 54 
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977) and subsequently omitted by the Constitution (Forty-third Amendment)  
Act, 1977, s. 11 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
224
(8) “debt” includes any liability in respect of any obligation to 
repay capital sums by way of annuities and any liability under any 
guarantee, and “debt charges” shall be construed accordingly;
(9) “estate duty” means a duty to be assessed on or by reference to 
the principal value, ascertained in accordance with such rules as may be 
prescribed by or under laws made by Parliament or the Legislature of a 
State relating to the duty, of all property passing upon death or deemed, 
under the provisions of the said laws, so to pass;
(10) “existing law” means any law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, 
rule or regulation passed or made before the commencement of this 
Constitution by any Legislature, authority or person having power to 
make such a law, Ordinance, order, bye-law, rule or regulation; 
(11) “Federal Court” means the Federal Court constituted under 
the Government of India Act, 1935;
(12) “goods” includes all materials, commodities, and articles;
1[(12A) “goods and services tax” means any tax on supply of 
goods, or services or both except taxes on the supply of the alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption];
(13) “guarantee” includes any obligation undertaken before the 
commencement of this Constitution to make payments in the event of the 
profits of an undertaking falling short of a specified amount;
(14) “High Court” means any Court which is deemed for the 
purposes of this Constitution to be a High Court for any State and 
includes—
(a) any Court in the territory of India constituted or 
reconstituted under this Constitution as a High Court; and
(b) any other Court in the territory of India which may be 
declared by Parliament by law to be a High Court for all or any of 
the purposes of this Constitution;
(15) “Indian State” means any territory which the Government of 
the Dominion of India recognised as such a State;
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 14(i)
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
225
(16) “Part”  means a Part of this Constitution;
(17) “pension” means a pension, whether contributory or not, of 
any kind whatsoever payable to or in respect of any person, and includes 
retired pay so payable; a gratuity so payable and any sum or sums so 
payable by way of the return, with or without interest thereon or any 
other addition thereto, of subscriptions to a provident fund;
(18) “Proclamation of Emergency” means a Proclamation issued 
under clause (1) of article 352; 
(19) “public notification” means a notification in the Gazette of 
India, or, as the case may be, the Official Gazette of a State;
(20) “railway” does not include—
(a) a tramway wholly within a municipal area; or
(b) any other line of communication wholly situate in one State 
and declared by Parliament by law not to be a railway;
1[(21)*
* 
*
*]
2[(22) “Ruler” means the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any 
time before the commencement of the Constitution (Twenty-sixth 
Amendment) Act, 1971, was recognised by the President as the Ruler of 
an Indian State or any person who, at any time before such 
commencement, was recognised by the President as the successor of 
such Ruler;]
(23) “Schedule” means a Schedule to this Constitution;
(24) “Scheduled Castes” means such castes, races or tribes or 
parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under 
article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purposes of this Constitution;
(25) “Scheduled Tribes” means such tribes or tribal communities 
or parts of or groups within such tribes or tribal communities as are 
deemed under article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes for the purposes of this 
Constitution;
______________________________________________
1. Cl. (21) omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 4 (w.e.f. 28-12-1971).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
226
(26) “securities” includes stock;
1* * * 
2[(26A) “Services” means anything other than goods;
(26B) “State” with reference to articles 246A, 268, 269, 269A and 
article 279A includes a Union territory with Legislature];
3[(26C) "socially and educationally backward classes" means such 
backward classes as are so deemed under article 342A for the purposes 
of the Central Government or the State or Union territory, as the case 
may be];
(27) “sub-clause” means a sub-clause of the clause in which the 
expression occurs;
(28) “taxation” includes the imposition of any tax or impost, 
whether general or local or special, and “tax” shall be construed 
accordingly; 
(29) “tax on income” includes a tax in the nature of an excess 
profits tax;
4[(29A) “tax on the sale or purchase of goods” includes— 
(a) a tax on the transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of a 
contract, of property in any goods for cash, deferred payment or 
other valuable consideration;
(b) a tax on the transfer of property in goods (whether as 
goods or in some other form)  involved in the execution of a 
works contract;
(c) a tax on the delivery of goods on hire-purchase or any 
system of payment by instalments; 
(d) a tax on the transfer of the right to use any goods for 
any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for cash, 
deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
______________________________________________
1. Cl. (26A) was ins. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 54 
(w.e.f. 1-2-1977), 
and subsequently omitted by the Constitution  (Forty-third
Amendment)  Act, 1977, s. 11 (w.e.f. 13-4-1978).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 14(ii) 
(w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Cl. (26C) was ins. by the Constitution (One Hundred and second Amendment) Act, 
2018, s. 5 (w.e.f. 14-8-2018), and subsequently subs. by the Constitution (One 
Hundred and Fifth Amendment) Act, 2021, s. 4 
(w.e.f. 15-9-2021).
4. Cl. (29A) ins. by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 4 
(w.e.f. 2-2-1983).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XIX.—MISCELLANEOUS)
227
(e) a tax on the supply of goods by any unincorporated 
association or body of persons to a member thereof for cash, 
deferred payment or other valuable consideration;
(f) a tax on the supply, by way of or as part of any service 
or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being food or any 
other article for human consumption or any drink (whether or not 
intoxicating), where such supply or service, is for cash, deferred 
payment or other valuable consideration, 
and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed to be 
a sale of those goods by the person making the transfer, delivery or 
supply and a purchase of those goods by the person to whom such 
transfer, delivery or supply is made;]
1[(30) "Union territory" means any Union territory specified in the 
First Schedule and includes any other territory comprised within the 
territory of India but not specified in that Schedule.] 
367. Interpretation.—(1) Unless the context otherwise requires, the 
General Clauses Act, 1897, shall, subject to any adaptations and modifications 
that may be made therein under article 372, apply for the interpretation of this 
Constitution as it applies for the interpretation of an Act of the Legislature of 
the Dominion of India.
(2) Any reference in this Constitution to Acts or laws of, or made by, 
Parliament, or to Acts or laws of, or made by, the Legislature of a State 2***, 
shall be construed as including a reference to an Ordinance made by the 
President or, to an Ordinance made by a Governor 3***, as the case may be. 
(3) For the purposes of this Constitution “foreign State” means any State 
other than India:
Provided that, subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, 
the President may by order4 declare any State not to be a foreign State for such 
purposes as may be specified in the order.
5[(4)   *                *                *                  *]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. for cl. (30)
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words and letters "specified in Part A or  Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by
s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. See the Constitution (Declaration as to Foreign States) Order, 1950 (C.O. 2).
5. Added by the Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019 
(C.O. 272) (w.e.f. 5-8-2019), for the text of this C.O., see Appendix II.

228
PART XX
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
368. 
1[Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and 
procedure therefor].— 2[(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, 
Parliament may in exercise of its constituent power amend by way of addition, 
variation or repeal any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the 
procedure laid down in this article.] 
3[(2)] An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the 
introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and when 
the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total membership of that 
House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members of that 
House present and voting, 4[it shall be presented to the President who shall give 
his assent to the Bill and thereupon] the Constitution shall stand amended in 
accordance with the terms of the Bill:
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in—
(a) article 54, article 55, article 73, 5[ article 162, article 241 or 
article 279A]; or
  (b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter I of Part XI; or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule; or
(d) the representation of States in Parliament; or
(e) the provisions of this article,
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s.  3, for  "Procedure 
for amendment of the Constitution" (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
3. Art. 368 re-numbered as cl. (2) thereof by s.  3, ibid. (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
4. Subs. by s.  3, ibid., (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 15,  for the 
words and figures "article 162 or article 241" (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XX.—Amendment of the Constitution)
229
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not less 
than one-half of the States 1*** by resolutions to that effect passed by those 
Legislatures before the Bill making provision for such amendment is presented 
to the President for assent.
2[(3) Nothing in article 13 shall apply to any amendment made under this 
article.]
3[(4) No  amendment  of  this Constitution (including the provisions of 
Part III) made or purporting to have been made under this article [whether before 
or after the commencement of section 55 of the Constitution (Forty-second 
Amendment) Act, 1976] shall be called in question in any court on any ground.
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that there shall be no 
limitation whatever on the constituent power of Parliament to amend by way of 
addition, variation or repeal the provisions of this Constitution under this article.]  
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A and  Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-11-1971).
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 55 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977). 
This  section has been  declared invalid by the Supreme Court in  Minerva Mills Ltd.   
and Others Vs. Union of India and Others AIR 1980 SC 1789.

230
PART XXI
1[TEMPORARY, TRANSITIONAL AND 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS] 
369. Temporary power to Parliament to make laws with respect to 
certain matters in the State List as if they were matters in the Concurrent 
List.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, Parliament shall, during 
a period of five years from the commencement of this Constitution, have power 
to make laws with respect to the following matters as if they were enumerated 
in the Concurrent List, namely:— 
(a) trade and commerce within a State in, and the production, supply 
and distribution of, cotton and woollen textiles, raw cotton (including 
ginned cotton and unginned cotton or kapas), cotton seed, paper 
(including newsprint), food-stuffs (including edible oilseeds and oil), 
cattle fodder (including oil-cakes and other concentrates), coal 
(including coke and derivatives of coal), iron, steel and mica;
(b) offences against laws with respect to any of the matters mentioned
in clause (a), jurisdiction and powers of all courts except the Supreme 
Court with respect to any of those matters, and fees in respect of any of 
those matters but not including fees taken in any court,
but any law made by Parliament, which Parliament would not but for the 
provisions of this article have been competent to make, shall, to the extent of the 
incompetency, cease to have effect on the expiration of the said period, except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before the expiration thereof.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2, for  "TEMPORARY
AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS" (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
231
1[370. Temporary provisions with respect  to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,— 
(a) the provisions of article 238 shall not apply in relation to the State 
of  Jammu and Kashmir; 
(b) the power of Parliament to make laws for the said State shall be 
limited to—
(i) those matters in the Union List and  the Concurrent List 
which, in consultation with the Government of the State, are declared 
by the President to correspond to matters specified in the Instrument 
of Accession governing the accession of the State to the Dominion  of 
India as the matters with respect to which the Dominion Legislature 
may make laws for that State; and
______________________________________________
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of article 370 read with clause (1) of 
article 370 of the Constitution of India, the President, on the recommendation of 
Parliament, is pleased to declare that, as from the 6th August, 2019 all clauses of said 
article 370 shall cease to be operative except the following which shall read as under, 
namely:—
“370. All provisions of this Constitution, as amended from time to time, 
without any modifications or exceptions, shall apply to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir notwithstanding anything contrary contained in article 152 or article 308 or 
any other article of this Constitution or any other provision of the Constitution of 
Jammu and Kashmir or any law, document, judgment, ordinance, order, by-law, rule, 
regulation, notification, custom or usage having the force of law in the territory of 
India, or any other instrument, treaty or agreement as envisaged under article 363 or 
otherwise.”.
(See Appendix III) (C.O. 273).
1. In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of the Constitution of India, the 
President, on the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir, declared that, as from the 17th day of November, 1952, the said art. 370 
shall be operative with the modification that for the Explanation in cl. (1) thereof, the 
following Explanation is substituted, namely:—
“Explanation.–For the purposes of this article, the Government of the State means 
the person for the time being recognised by the President on the recommendation of 
the Legislative Assembly of the State as the *Sadar-I-Riyasat of Jammu and Kashmir, 
acting on the advice of the Council of Ministers of the State for the time being in 
office.”.
(C.O. 44, dated the 15th November, 1952).
*Now “Governor”.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
232
(ii) such other matters in the said Lists as, with the concurrence 
of the Government of the State, the President may by order specify. 
Explanation.—For  the   purposes   of    this   article,   the 
Government of the State means the person for the time  being recognised 
by the President as the Maharaja of Jammu  and Kashmir acting on the 
advice of the Council of  Ministers for the time being in office under the 
Maharaja’s Proclamation dated the fifth day of March, 1948; 
(c) the provisions of article 1 and of this article shall apply in relation 
to that State;
(d) such of the other provisions of this Constitution shall apply in 
relation to that State subject to such exceptions and modifications as the 
President may by order specify:
Provided that no such order which relates to the matters specified in the 
Instrument 
of Accession 
of the State referred to in paragraph (i) of 
sub-clause (b) shall be issued except in consultation with the Government of 
the State: 
Provided further that no such order which relates to matters other than 
those referred to in the last preceding proviso shall be issued except with the 
concurrence of that Government.
(2) If the concurrence of  the Government of the State referred to in 
paragraph (ii) of sub-clause (b) of clause (1) or in the second proviso to 
sub-clause (d) of that clause be given before the Constituent Assembly for the 
purpose of framing the Constitution  of the State is convened, it shall be placed 
before such Assembly for such decision  as it may take thereon.
(3) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this article, 
the President may, by public notification, declare that this article shall cease to 
be operative or shall be operative only with such exceptions and modifications 
and from such date as  he may specify:
Provided that the recommendation of the 1[clause (2) of Legislative
Assembly of the State] shall be necessary before the President issues such a 
notification.
______________________________________________
See Appendix II.
1. Subs. by C.O. 272, dated the 5-8-2019, s.2. for “Constituent Assembly of the State 
referred to in clause (2)” (w.e.f. 5-8-2019).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
233
1[371. Special provision with respect to the States of  2***
Maharashtra and Gujarat.—3[(1)*             *          
*               *                *]
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may by 
order made with respect to 4[the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat], provide for 
any special responsibility of the Governor for—
(a) the establishment of separate development boards for Vidarbha, 
Marathwada, 5[and the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case may be], 
Saurashtra, Kutch and the rest of Gujarat with the provision that a report 
on the working of  each of these boards will be placed each year before 
the State Legislative Assembly;
(b) the equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure 
over the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole; 
and
(c) an equitable arrangement providing  adequate facilities for 
technical education and vocational training, and adequate opportunities 
for employment in services under the control of the State Government, in 
respect of all the said areas, subject to the requirements of the State as a 
whole.]
6[371A. Special provision with respect to the State of Nagaland.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of—
(i) religious or social practices of the Nagas;
(ii) Naga customary law and procedure;
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving 
decisions according to Naga customary law;
(iv) ownership and transfer of land and its resources,
shall apply to the State of Nagaland unless the Legislative Assembly of   
Nagaland by a resolution so decides;
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 22, for art. 371       
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "Andhra Pradesh", omitted by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) 
Act, 1973, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
3. Cl. (1) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
4. Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 85, for "the State of 
Bombay" (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
5. Subs. by s. 85, ibid., for "the rest of Maharashtra" (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
6. Art. 371A ins. by the Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 1-12-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
234
(b) the Governor of Nagaland shall have special responsibility with 
respect to law and order in the State of Nagaland for so long as in his 
opinion internal disturbances occurring in the Naga Hills-Tuensang Area 
immediately before the formation of that State continue therein  or in any 
part thereof and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto the 
Governor shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his 
individual judgment as to the action to be taken:
Provided that if any question  arises whether any matter is or is 
not a matter as respects which the Governor is under  this sub-clause 
required to act in the exercise of his individual judgment, the decision of 
the Governor in  his discretion shall be  final, and the validity of 
anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question on the 
ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in the exercise of his 
individual judgment: 
Provided further that if the President on receipt  of a report from 
the Governor or otherwise is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for 
the Governor to have special responsibility with respect to law and order 
in the State of Nagaland, he may by order direct that the Governor shall 
cease to have such responsibility with effect from such date as may be 
specified in the order;
(c) in making his recommendation with respect to any demand for a 
grant, the Governor of Nagaland shall ensure that any money provided 
by the Government of India out of the Consolidated Fund of  India for 
any specific service or purpose is included in the demand for a grant 
relating to that service or purpose and not in any other demand;
(d) as from such date as the Governor of Nagaland may by public 
notification in this behalf specify, there shall be established a regional 
council for the Tuensang district consisting  of thirty-five members and 
the Governor shall in his discretion make rules providing for—
(i) the composition of the regional council and the manner in 
which the members of the regional council shall be chosen:
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner of the Tuensang district  
shall be the Chairman ex officio of the regional council and the Vice-
Chairman of the regional council shall be elected by the members 
thereof from amongst themselves;
(ii) the qualifications for being chosen as, and for being, 
members of the regional council;
(iii) the term of office of, and the salaries and allowances, if any, 
to be paid to members of, the regional council;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
235
(iv) the procedure and conduct of business of the regional council;
(v) the appointment  of officers and staff of the regional council 
and their conditions of services; and
(vi) any other matter in respect of which it is necessary to make 
rules for the constitution and proper functioning of the regional council.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, for a period of ten 
years from the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland or for such further 
period as the Governor may, on the recommendation of the regional council, by 
public notification specify in this behalf,—
(a) the administration of the Tuensang district shall be carried on by 
the Governor;
(b) where any money is provided by the Government of India to the 
Government of Nagaland to meet the requirements of the State of 
Nagaland as a whole, the Governor shall in his discretion arrange for an 
equitable allocation of that money between the Tuensang district and the 
rest of the State;
(c) no Act of the Legislature of Nagaland shall apply to Tuensang 
district unless the Governor, on the recommendation of the regional 
council, by public notification so directs and the Governor in giving such 
direction with respect to any such Act may direct that the Act shall in its 
application to the Tuensang district or any part thereof have effect 
subject to such exceptions or modifications as the Governor may specify 
on the recommendation of the regional council:
Provided that any direction given under this sub-clause may be 
given so as to have retrospective effect;
(d) the Governor may make regulations for the peace, progress and good 
government of the Tuensang district and any regulations so made may repeal 
or amend with retrospective effect, if necessary, any Act of Parliament or any 
other law which is for the time being applicable to that district;
(e) (i) one of the members representing the Tuensang district in the 
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland shall be appointed Minister for 
Tuensang affairs by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister 
and the Chief Minister in tendering his advice shall act on the 
recommendation of the majority of the members as aforesaid1;
______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 2 of the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. X  provides 
(w.e.f. 1-12-1963) that article 371A of the Constitution of India shall have effect as if 
the following proviso were added to paragraph (i) of sub-clause  (e) of clause (2) 
thereof, namely:—
"Provided that the Governor may, on the advice of the Chief Minister, appoint 
any person as Minister for Tuensang affairs to act as such until such time as persons 
are chosen in accordance with law to fill the seats allocated to the Tuensang district, in 
the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland.".

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
236
(ii) the Minister for Tuensang affairs shall deal with, and have 
direct access to the Governor on, all matters relating to the Tuensang 
district but he shall keep the Chief Minister informed about the same;
(f) notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this 
clause, the final decision on all matters relating to the Tuensang district 
shall be made by the Governor in his discretion;
(g) in articles 54 and 55 and clause (4) of article 80, references to the 
elected members of the Legislative Assembly of a State or to each such 
member shall include references to the members or member of the 
Legislative Assembly of Nagaland elected by the regional council 
established under this article;
(h) in article 170—
(i) clause (1) shall, in relation to the Legislative Assembly of 
Nagaland, have effect as if for the word “sixty”, the word “forty-
six” had been substituted; 
(ii) in the said clause, the reference to direct election from 
territorial constituencies in the State shall include election by the 
members of the regional council established under this article;
(iii) in clauses (2) and (3), references to territorial constituencies
shall mean references to territorial constituencies in the Kohima 
and Mokokchung districts.
(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the foregoing 
provisions of this article, the President may by order do anything (including 
any adaptation or modification of any other article) which appears to him to be 
necessary for the purpose of removing that difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of three 
years from the date of the formation of the State of Nagaland.
Explanation.—In this article, the Kohima, Mokokchung and Tuensang 
districts shall have the same meanings as in the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.]
1[371B. Special provision with respect to the State of Assam.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order 
made with respect to the State of Assam, provide for the constitution and 
functions of a committee of the Legislative Assembly of the State consisting of 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-second Amendment) Act, 1969, s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-9-1969).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
237
members of that Assembly elected from the tribal areas specified in 1[Part I] of 
the table appended to paragraph 20 of the Sixth Schedule and such number of 
other members of that Assembly as may be specified in the order and for the 
modifications to be made in the rules of procedure of that Assembly for the 
constitution and proper functioning of such committee.]
2[371C. Special provision with respect to the State of Manipur.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the President may, by order made 
with respect to the State of Manipur, provide for the constitution and functions of 
a committee  of the Legislative Assembly of the State  consisting of members of 
that Assembly elected from the Hill Areas of that State, for the modifications to 
be made in the rules of business of the Government and in the rules of procedure 
of the Legislative Assembly of the State and for any special responsibility of the 
Governor in order to secure the proper functioning of such committee.
(2) The Governor shall annually, or whenever so required by the President, 
make a report to the President regarding the administration of the Hill Areas in 
the State of Manipur and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the 
giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas.
Explanation.—In this article, the expression “Hill Areas” means such 
areas as the President may, by order, declare to be Hill areas.]
3[371D. Special provisions with respect to 4[the State of Andhra 
Pradesh or the State of Telangana].—5[(1) The President may by order made 
with respect  to the State of Andhra Pradesh or the State of Telangana, provide, 
having regard to the requirement of each State, for equitable opportunities and 
facilities for the people belonging to different parts of such State, in the matter 
of public employment and in the matter of education, and different provisions 
may be made for various parts of the States.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for 
"Part A" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Art 371C ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-seventh Amendment) Act, 1971, s. 5
(w.e.f. 15-2-1972).
3. Art 371D and Art 371E ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act,
1973, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).
4. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, (6 of 2014), s. 97, for “the 
State of Andhra Pradesh”  (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
5. Subs. by s. 97, ibid, for cl. (1) (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
238
(2) An order made under clause (1) may, in particular,—
(a) require the State Government to organise any class or classes of 
posts in a civil service of, or any class or classes of civil posts under, the 
State  into different local cadres for different parts of the State and allot 
in accordance with such principles and procedure as may be specified in 
the order the persons holding such posts to the local cadres so organised; 
(b) specify any part or parts of the State which shall be regarded as 
the local area—
(i) for direct recruitment to posts in any local cadre (whether 
organised in pursuance of an order under this article or constituted 
otherwise) under the State Government;
 (ii) for direct recruitment to posts in any cadre under any local 
authority within the State; and 
(iii) for the purposes of admission to any University within the 
State or to any other educational institution which is subject to the 
control of the State Government; 
(c) specify the extent to which, the manner in which and the 
conditions subject to which, preference or reservation shall be given or 
made—
(i) in the matter of direct recruitment to posts in any such cadre 
referred to in sub-clause (b) as may be  specified in this behalf in 
the order;
(ii) in the matter of admission to any such University or other 
educational institution referred to in sub-clause (b) as may be 
specified in this behalf in the order,
to or in favour of candidates who have resided or studied for any period 
specified in the order in the local area in respect of such cadre, 
University or other educational institution, as the case may be.
(3) The President may, by order, provide for the constitution of an 
Administrative Tribunal for 1[the State of Andhra Pradesh and for the State of 
Telangana] to exercise such jurisdiction, powers and authority [including any 
jurisdiction, power and authority which immediately before the commencement 
of the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, was exercisable by 
any court (other than the Supreme Court) or by any tribunal or other authority]
as may be specified in the order with respect to the following matters, 
namely:— 
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, (6 of 2014), s. 97, for “the 
State of Andhra Pradesh” (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
239
(a) appointment, allotment or promotion to such class or classes of 
posts in any civil service of the State, or to such class or classes of civil 
posts under the State, or to such class or classes of posts under the 
control of any local authority within the State, as may be specified in the 
order;
(b) seniority of persons appointed, allotted or promoted to such class 
or classes of posts in any civil service of the State, or to such class or 
classes of civil posts under the State, or to such class or classes of posts 
under the control of any local authority within the State, as may be 
specified in the order;
(c) such other conditions of service of persons appointed, allotted or 
promoted to such class or classes of posts in any civil service of the State 
or to such class or classes of civil posts under the State or to such class 
or classes of posts under the control of any local authority within the 
State, as may be specified in the order.
(4) An order made under clause (3) may—
(a) authorise the Administrative Tribunal to receive representations 
for the redress of grievances relating to any matter within its jurisdiction 
as the President may specify in the order and to make such orders 
thereon as the Administrative Tribunal deems fit;
(b) contain such provisions with respect to the powers and authorities 
and procedure of the Administrative Tribunal (including provisions with 
respect to the powers of the Administrative Tribunal to punish for 
contempt of itself) as the President may deem necessary;
(c) provide for the transfer to the Administrative Tribunal of such 
classes of proceedings, being proceedings relating to matters within its 
jurisdiction and pending before any court (other than the Supreme Court) 
or tribunal or other authority immediately before the commencement of 
such order, as may be specified in the order;
(d) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential 
provisions (including provisions as to fees and as to limitation, evidence 
or for the application of any law for the time being in force subject to 
any exceptions or modifications) as the President may deem necessary.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
240
(5) The Order of the Administrative Tribunal finally disposing of any 
case shall become effective upon its confirmation by the State Government or 
on the expiry of three months from the date on which the order is made, 
whichever is earlier:
Provided that the State Government may, by special order made in 
writing and for reasons to be specified therein, modify or annul any order of the 
Administrative Tribunal before it becomes effective and in such a case, the 
order of the Administrative Tribunal shall have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be.
(6) Every special order made by the State Government under the proviso 
to clause (5) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before both 
Houses of the State Legislature.
(7) The High Court for the State shall not have any powers of 
superintendence over the Administrative Tribunal and no court (other than the 
Supreme Court) or tribunal shall exercise any jurisdiction, power or authority in 
respect of any matter subject to the jurisdiction, power or authority of, or in 
relation to, the Administrative Tribunal.
(8) If the President is satisfied that the continued existence of the 
Administrative Tribunal is not necessary, the President may by order abolish 
the Administrative Tribunal and make such provisions in such order as he may 
deem fit for the transfer and disposal of cases pending before the Tribunal 
immediately before such abolition.
(9) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal 
or other authority,—
(a) no appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of any person—
(i) made before the 1st day of November, 1956, to any post 
under the Government of, or any local authority within, the State 
of Hyderabad as it existed before that date; or
(ii) made before the commencement of the Constitution 
(Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, to any post under the 
Government of, or any local or other authority within, the State of 
Andhra Pradesh; and
(b) no action taken or thing done by or before any person referred to 
in sub-clause (a),
______________________________________________
In P. Sambamurthy and  Others Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and Others (1987) 
1 S.C.C. 362, the Supreme Court declared cl. (5) of art. 371D along with the proviso to 
be unconstitutional  and void. 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
241
shall be deemed to be illegal or void or ever to have become illegal or void 
merely on the ground that the appointment, posting, promotion or transfer of 
such person was not made in accordance with any law, then in force, providing 
for any requirement as to residence within the State of Hyderabad or, as the 
case may be, within any part of the State of Andhra Pradesh, in respect of such 
appointment, posting, promotion or transfer.
 (10) The provisions of this article and of any order made by the 
President thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything in any other 
provision of this Constitution or in any other law for the time being in force.
371E. Establishment of Central University in Andhra Pradesh.—
Parliament may by law provide for the establishment of a University in the 
State of Andhra Pradesh.]
1[371F. Special provisions with respect to the State of Sikkim.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall consist of 
not less than thirty members;
(b) as from the date of commencement of the Constitution 
(Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975 (hereafter in this article referred to 
as the appointed day)—
(i) the Assembly for Sikkim formed as a result of the elections 
held in Sikkim in April, 1974 with thirty-two members elected in the 
said elections (hereinafter referred to as the sitting members) shall be 
deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim duly 
constituted under this Constitution;
(ii) the sitting members shall be deemed to be the members of 
the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim duly elected under 
this Constitution; and
(iii) the said Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim shall 
exercise the powers and perform the functions of the Legislative 
Assembly of a State under this Constitution;
______________________________________________
1. Art 371F ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 3 
(w.e.f. 26-4-1975).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
242
(c) in the case of the Assembly deemed to be the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Sikkim under clause (b), the references to the 
period of 1[five years], in clause (1) of article 172 shall be construed as 
references to a period of 2[four years] and the said period of 2[four years]
shall be deemed to commence from the appointed day; 
(d) until other provisions are made by Parliament by law, there shall 
be allotted to the State of Sikkim one seat in the House of the People and 
the State of Sikkim shall form one parliamentary constituency to be 
called the parliamentary constituency for Sikkim;
(e) the representative of the State of Sikkim in the House of the 
People in existence on the appointed day shall be elected by the 
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim; 
(f) Parliament may, for the purpose of protecting the rights and 
interests of the different sections of the population of Sikkim make 
provision for the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Sikkim which may be filled by candidates belonging to such 
sections and for the delimitation of the assembly constituencies from 
which candidates belonging to such sections alone may stand for election 
to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Sikkim;
(g) the Governor of Sikkim shall have special responsibility for peace 
and for an equitable arrangement for ensuring the social and economic 
advancement of different sections of the population of Sikkim and in the 
discharge of his special responsibility under this clause, the Governor of 
Sikkim shall, subject to such directions as the President may, from time 
to time, deem fit to issue, act in his discretion;
(h) all property and assets (whether within or outside the territories 
comprised in the State of Sikkim) which immediately before the appointed 
day were vested in the Government of Sikkim or in any other authority or 
in any person for the purposes of the Government of Sikkim shall, as from 
the appointed day, vest in the Government of the State of Sikkim;
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution  (Forty-second Amendment)  Act, 1976, s. 56, for "five years”
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment)  Act, 
1978, s. 43,  for "six years" (w.e.f. 6-9-1979). 
2. Subs. by s. 56, ibid., for "four years" (w.e.f. 3-1-1977) and further subs. by s. 43, ibid., 
for "five years", respectively (w.e.f. 6-9-1979). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
243
(i) the High Court functioning as such immediately before the 
appointed day in the territories comprised in the State of Sikkim shall, on 
and from the appointed day, be deemed to be the High Court for the 
State of Sikkim;
(j) all courts of civil, criminal and revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and 
all officers, judicial, executive and ministerial, throughout the territory of the 
State of Sikkim shall continue on and from the appointed day to exercise 
their respective functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution;
(k) all laws in force immediately before the appointed day in the 
territories comprised in the State of Sikkim or any part thereof shall 
continue to be in force therein until amended or repealed by a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority;
(l) for the purpose of facilitating the application of any such law as is 
referred to in clause (k) in relation to the administration of the State of 
Sikkim and for the purpose of bringing the provisions of any such law 
into accord with the provisions of this Constitution, the President may, 
within two years from the appointed day, by order, make such 
adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or 
amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon, every 
such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so 
made, and any such adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in 
any court of law;
(m) neither the Supreme Court nor any other court shall have 
jurisdiction in respect of any dispute or other matter arising out of any 
treaty, agreement, engagement or other similar instrument relating to 
Sikkim which was entered into or executed before the appointed day and 
to which the Government of India or any of its predecessor Governments 
was a party, but nothing in this clause shall be construed to derogate 
from the provisions of article 143;
(n) the President may, by public notification, extend with such restrictions 
or modifications as he thinks fit to the State of Sikkim any enactment which 
is in force in a State in India at the date of the notification;
(o) if any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the foregoing 
provisions of this article, the President may, by order , do anything 
(including any adaptation or modification of any other article) which 
appears to him to be necessary for the purpose of removing that 
difficulty:
______________________________________________
 See the Constitution (Removal of Difficulties) Order No. XI (C.O. 99).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
244
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two 
years from the appointed day;
(p) all things done and all actions taken in or in relation to the State 
of Sikkim or the territories comprised therein during the period 
commencing on the appointed day and ending immediately before the 
date on which the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, 
receives the assent of the President shall, in so far as they are in 
conformity with the provisions of this Constitution as amended by the 
Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, be deemed for all 
purposes to have been validly done or taken under this Constitution as so 
amended.] 
1[371G. Special provision with respect to the State of Mizoram.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) no Act of Parliament in respect of— 
(i) religious or social practices of the Mizos;
(ii) Mizo customary law and procedure; 
(iii) administration of civil and criminal justice involving 
decisions according to Mizo customary law;
(iv) ownership and transfer of land;
shall apply to the State of Mizoram unless the Legislative Assembly of 
the State of Mizoram by a resolution so decides:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to any Central Act in 
force in the Union territory of Mizoram immediately before the 
commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986;
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram shall consist of 
not less than forty members.]
2[371H. Special provision with respect to the State of Arunachal 
Pradesh.—Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution,—
(a) the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall have special 
responsibility with respect to law and order in the State of Arunachal 
Pradesh and in the discharge of his functions in relation thereto, the 
Governor shall, after consulting the Council of Ministers, exercise his 
individual judgment as to the action to be taken:
______________________________________________
1. Art. 371G ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-third Amendment) Act, 1986.s. 2 
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
2. Art. 371H ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-fifth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 2
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
245
Provided that if any question arises whether any matter is or is not a 
matter as respects which the Governor is under this clause required to act 
in the exercise of his individual judgment, the decision of the Governor in 
his discretion shall be final, and the validity of anything done by the 
Governor shall not be called in question on the ground that he ought or 
ought not to have acted in the exercise of his individual judgment:
Provided further that if the President on receipt of a report from 
the Governor or otherwise is satisfied that it is no longer necessary for 
the Governor to have special responsibility with respect to law and order 
in the State of Arunachal Pradesh, he may by order direct that the 
Governor shall cease to have such responsibility with effect from such 
date as may be specified in the order;
(b) the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh 
shall consist of not less than thirty members.]
1[371-I. Special provision with respect to the State of Goa.—
Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Goa shall consist of not less than thirty members.]
2[371J. Special provisions with respect to State of Karnataka.—
(1) The President may, by order made with respect to the State of Karnataka, 
provide for any special responsibility of the Governor for—
(a) establishment of a separate development board for Hyderabad-
Karnataka region with the provision that a report on the working of the 
board will be placed each year before the State Legislative Assembly; 
(b) equitable allocation of funds for developmental expenditure 
over the said region, subject  to the requirements of the State as a whole; 
and 
(c) equitable opportunities and facilities for the people belonging 
to the said region, in matters of public employment, education and 
vocational training, subject to the requirements of the State as a whole.
(2) An order made under sub- clause (c) of clause (1) may provide for—
(a) reservation of a proportion of  seats educational and vocational 
training institutions in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region for students who 
belong to that region by birth or by domicile; and 
______________________________________________
1.
Art. 371-I ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
2. Art. 371J ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-eighth Amendment) Act, 2012, s. 2 (w.e.f. 
1-10-2013).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
246
(b) identification of posts or classes of posts under the State 
Government and in any body or organisation under the control of the 
State Government in the Hyderabad-Karnataka region and reservation of 
a proportion of such posts for persons who belong to that region by birth 
or by domicile and for appointment thereto by direct recruitment or by 
promotion or in any other manner as may be specified in the order.]
372. Continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation.—(1) 
Notwithstanding the repeal by this Constitution of the enactments referred to in 
article 395 but subject to the other provisions of this Constitution, all the law in 
force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution shall continue in force therein until altered or repealed or amended 
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.
(2) For the purpose of bringing the provisions of any law in force in the 
territory of India into accord with the provisions of this Constitution, the 
President may by order make such adaptations and modifications of such law, 
whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and 
provide that the law shall, as from such date as may be specified in the order, 
have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made, and any such 
adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law.
(3) Nothing in clause (2) shall be deemed—
(a) to empower the President to make any adaptation or 
modification of any law after the expiration of 1[three years] from the 
commencement of this Constitution; or
(b) to prevent any competent Legislature or other competent 
authority from repealing or amending any law adapted or modified by 
the President under the said clause.
______________________________________________
See the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, dated the 26th January, 1950, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, p. 449, as amended by notification No. S.R.O. 115, dated the 5th 
June, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 51, notification No. 
S.R.O. 870, dated the 4th November, 1950, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
Section 3, p. 903, notification No. S.R.O. 508, dated the 4th April, 1951, Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 287, notification No. S.R.O. 1140B, dated 
the 2nd July, 1952, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 616/1, and the 
Adaptation of the Travancore-Cochin Land Acquisition Laws Order, 1952, dated the 
20th November, 1952, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, p. 923.
1. Subs. by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s.12 for "two years"
(w.e.f. 18-6-1951).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
247
Explanation I.—The expression “law in force” in this article shall 
include a law passed or made by a Legislature or other competent authority in 
the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution and not 
previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not be then in 
operation either at all or in particular areas.
Explanation II.—Any law passed or made by a Legislature or other 
competent authority in the territory of India which immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution had extra-territorial effect as well as effect 
in the territory of India shall, subject to any such adaptations and modifications 
as aforesaid, continue to have such extra-territorial effect.
Explanation III.—Nothing in this article shall be construed as continuing 
any temporary law in force beyond the date fixed for its expiration or the date 
on which it would have expired if this Constitution had  not come into force.
Explanation IV.—An Ordinance promulgated by the Governor of a 
Province under section 88 of the Government of India Act, 1935, and in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless 
withdrawn by the Governor of the corresponding State earlier, cease to operate 
at the expiration of six weeks from the first meeting after such commencement 
of the Legislative Assembly of that State functioning under clause (1) of article 
382, and  nothing in this article shall be construed as continuing any such 
Ordinance in force beyond the said period.
1[372A.  Power of the President to adapt laws.—(1) For the purposes 
of bringing the provisions of any law in force in India or in any part thereof, 
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, into accord with the provisions of this Constitution as 
amended by that Act, the President may by order made before the first day of 
November, 1957, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether 
by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and provide 
that the law shall, as from such date as may be  specified in the order, have 
effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made, and any such 
adaptation or modification shall not be questioned in any court of law.
(2) Nothing in clause (1) shall be deemed to  prevent a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law 
adapted or modified by the President  under the said clause.]
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 23 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
 See the Adaptation of Laws Order of 1956 and 1957. 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
248
373. Power of President to make order in respect of persons under 
preventive detention in certain cases.—Until provision is made by Parliament 
under clause (7) of article 22, or until the expiration of one year from the 
commencement of this Constitution, whichever  is earlier, the said  article shall 
have effect as if for any reference to Parliament in clauses (4) and (7) thereof 
there were substituted a reference to the President and for any reference to any 
law made by Parliament in those clauses there were substituted a reference to 
an order made by the President.
374. Provisions as to Judges of the Federal Court and proceedings 
pending in the Federal Court or before His Majesty in Council.—(1) The 
Judges of the Federal Court holding office immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, 
become on such commencement the Judges of the Supreme Court and shall 
thereupon be entitled to such salaries and allowances and to such rights in 
respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for under article 125 in 
respect of the Judges of the Supreme Court.
(2) All suits, appeals and proceedings, civil or criminal, pending in the 
Federal Court at the commencement of this Constitution shall stand removed to 
the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and 
determine the same, and the judgments and  orders of the Federal Court delivered 
or made before the  commencement of this Constitution shall have the same force 
and effect as if they had been delivered or made by the Supreme Court.
(3) Nothing in this Constitution shall operate to invalidate the exercise of 
jurisdiction by His Majesty in Council to dispose of appeals and petitions from, 
or in respect of, any judgment, decree or order of any court within the territory 
of India in so far as the exercise of such jurisdiction is authorised by law, and 
any order of His Majesty in Council made on any such appeal or petition after 
the commencement of this Constitution shall for all purposes have effect as if it 
were an order or decree made by the Supreme Court in the exercise of the  
jurisdiction conferred on such Court by this Constitution.
(4) On and from the commencement of this Constitution the jurisdiction of 
the authority functioning as the Privy Council in a State specified in Part B of the 
First Schedule to entertain and dispose of appeals and petitions from or in respect 
of any judgment, decree or order of any court within that State shall cease, and all 
appeals and other proceedings pending before the said authority at such 
commencement shall be transferred to, and disposed of by, the Supreme Court.
(5) Further provision may be made by Parliament by law to give effect to 
the provisions of this article.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
249
375. Courts, authorities and officers to continue to function subject 
to the provisions of the Constitution.—All courts of civil, criminal and 
revenue jurisdiction, all authorities and all officers, judicial, executive and 
ministerial, throughout the territory of India, shall continue to exercise their 
respective functions subject to the provisions of this Constitution.
376. Provisions as to Judges of High Courts.—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything in clause (2) of article 217, the Judges of a High Court in any 
Province holding office immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become on such 
commencement the Judges of the High Court in the corresponding State, and 
shall thereupon be entitled to such salaries and allowances and to such rights in  
respect of leave of absence and pension as are provided for under article 221 in 
respect of the Judges of such High Court. 1[Any such Judge shall, 
notwithstanding that he is not a citizen of India, be eligible for appointment as 
Chief Justice of such High Court, or as Chief Justice or other Judge of any 
other High Court.] 
(2) The Judges of a High Court in any Indian State corresponding to any 
State specified in Part B of the First Schedule holding office immediately 
before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they have elected 
otherwise, become on such commencement the Judges of the High Court in the 
State so specified and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses  (1) and (2) of 
article 217 but subject to the proviso to clause (1) of that article, continue to hold 
office until the expiration of such period as the President may by order determine. 
(3)  In this article, the expression “Judge” does not include an acting Judge 
or an additional Judge.
377. Provisions as to Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.—The 
Auditor-General of India holding office immediately before the commencement of 
this Constitution shall, unless  he has elected otherwise, become on such 
commencement the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and shall thereupon 
be entitled to such salaries and to such rights in respect of leave of absence and 
pension as are provided for under clause (3) of article 148 in respect of the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and be entitled to continue to hold office 
until the expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions which 
were applicable to him immediately before such commencement.
______________________________________________
1. Added by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
250
378. Provisions as to Public Service Commissions.—(1) The members 
of the Public Service Commission for the Dominion of India holding office 
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they 
have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the members of the 
Public Service Commission for the Union and shall, notwithstanding anything in 
clauses (1) and (2) of article 316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of that 
article, continue to hold office until the expiration of their term of office as 
determined under the rules which were applicable immediately before such 
commencement to such members.
(2) The Members of a Public Service Commission of a Province or of a 
Public Service Commission serving the needs of a group of Provinces holding 
office immediately before the commencement of this Constitution shall, unless they 
have elected otherwise, become on such commencement the members of the Public 
Service Commission for the corresponding State or the members of the Joint State 
Public Service Commission  serving the needs of the corresponding States, as the 
case may be, and shall, notwithstanding anything in clauses (1) and (2) of article 
316 but subject to the proviso to clause (2) of that article, continue to hold office 
until the expiration of their term of office as determined under the rules which  were 
applicable immediately before such commencement to such members.
1[378A. Special provision as to duration of Andhra Pradesh 
Legislative Assembly.—Notwithstanding anything contained in article 172, the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Andhra Pradesh as constituted under the 
provisions of sections 28 and 29 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, shall, 
unless sooner dissolved, continue for a period of five years from the date referred 
to in the said section 29 and no longer and the expiration of the said period shall 
operate as a dissolution of that Legislative Assembly.]
379. [Provisions as to provisional Parliament and the Speaker and 
Deputy Speaker thereof.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
380. [Provision as to President.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
381. [Council of Ministers of the President.].—Omitted
by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
382. [Provisions as to provisional Legislatures for States in Part A of the 
First Schedule.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
383. [Provision as to Governors of Provinces.].—Omitted by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
______________________________________________
1. Art 378A ins. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 24 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Part XXI.—Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions)
251
384. [Council of Ministers of the Governors.].—Omitted by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
385. [Provision as to provisional Legislatures in States in Part B of the 
First Schedule.].—Omitted
by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
386. [Council of Ministers for  States in Part B of the First Schedule.].—
Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
387. [Special provision as to determination of population for the 
purposes of certain elections.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 
388. [Provisions as to the filling of casual vacancies in the  provisional 
Parliament and  provisional Legislatures of the States.].—Omitted by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
389. [Provision as to Bills pending in the Dominion Legislatures and  in 
the Legislatures of Provinces and Indian States.] —Omitted by the Constitution 
(Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
390. [Money received or raised or expenditure incurred between the 
commencement of the Constitution and the 31st day of March, 1950].—Omitted
by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-
1956).
391. [Power of the President to amend the First and Fourth Schedules in 
certain contingencies.].—Omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) 
Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
392. Power of the President to remove difficulties.—(1) The President 
may, for the purpose of removing any difficulties, particularly in relation to the 
transition from the provisions of the Government of India Act, 1935, to the 
provisions of this Constitution, by order direct that this Constitution shall, 
during such period as may be specified in the order, have effect subject to such 
adaptations, whether by way of modification, addition or omission, as he may 
deem to be necessary or expedient:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the first meeting of 
Parliament duly constituted under Chapter II of Part V.
(2) Every order made under clause (1) shall be laid before Parliament.
(3) The powers conferred on the President by this article, by article 324, by 
clause (3) of article 367 and by article 391 shall, before the commencement of this 
Constitution, be exercisable by the Governor-General of the Dominion of India.

252
PART XXII
SHORT TITLE, COMMENCEMENT, 1[AUTHORITATIVE 
TEXT IN HINDI] AND REPEALS
393. Short title.—This Constitution may be called the Constitution of 
India. 
394.  Commencement.—This article and articles 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 60,  324, 
366, 367, 379, 380, 388, 391, 392 and 393 shall come into force at once, and 
the remaining provisions of this Constitution shall come into force on the 
twenty-sixth day of January, 1950, which day is referred to in this Constitution 
as the commencement of this Constitution. 
2[394A. Authoritative text in the Hindi language.—(1) The President 
shall cause to be published under his authority,— 
(a) the translation of this Constitution in the Hindi language, 
signed by the members of the Constituent Assembly, with such 
modifications as may be necessary to bring it in conformity with the 
language, style and terminology adopted in the authoritative texts of 
Central Acts in the Hindi language, and incorporating therein all the 
amendments of this Constitution made before such publication; and
(b) the translation in the Hindi language of every amendment of 
this Constitution made in the English language. 
(2) The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof 
published under clause (1) shall be construed to have the same meaning as  the 
original thereof and if any difficulty arises in so construing any part of such 
translation, the President shall cause the same to be revised suitably.
(3) The translation of this Constitution and of every amendment thereof 
published under this article shall  be deemed to be, for all purposes, the 
authoritative text thereof in the Hindi language.]
395. Repeals.—
The Indian Independence Act, 1947, and the 
Government of India Act, 1935, together with all enactments amending or 
supplementing the latter Act, but not including the Abolition of Privy Council 
Jurisdiction Act, 1949, are hereby repealed.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1987, s. 2 (w.e.f. 9-12-1987).
2. Art 394A, Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-12-1987).

253
 
1[FIRST SCHEDULE 
[Articles 1 and 4]
I. THE STATES 
 
Name
Territories
1. 
Andhra 
Pradesh
 
 
2[The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of 
the Andhra State Act, 1953, sub-section (1) of section 3 of  
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, the First Schedule to 
the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) 
Act, 1959, and the Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and 
Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968, but excluding 
the territories specified in the Second Schedule to the 
Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) 
Act, 1959] 3[and the territories specified in section 3 of 
the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014].
2. Assam
The 
territories 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement of this Constitution were comprised in the 
Province of Assam, the Khasi States and the Assam Tribal 
Areas, 
but 
excluding 
the 
territories 
specified 
in 
the 
Schedule 
to 
the 
Assam 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1951 4[and the territories 
specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the State of 
Nagaland Act, 1962]
5[and the territories specified in 
sections 5, 6 and 7 of the North-Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971] 6[and the territories referred 
to in Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution 
(One 
Hundredth 
Amendment) 
Act, 
2015, 
notwithstanding 
anything 
contained 
in clause (a) of section 3 of the Constitution 
(Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the 
territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule to 
the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 
2015.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2, for the First Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968 (36 of 1968), s. 4, 
for the former entry (w.e.f. 1-10-1968).
3. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (6 of 2014), s. 10 (w.e.f. 2-6-2014). 
4. Added by the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 (27 of 1962), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).  
5. Added by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 9 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
6. Added by the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31-7-2015). For 
the text of the Act, see Appendix I.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
254
3. Bihar 
1[The territories 
which 
immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution were either 
comprised in the Province of Bihar or were being 
administered as if they formed part of that  Province 
and the territories specified  in clause (a) of 
sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar 
Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, but 
excluding the territories specified in sub-section (1) of 
section 
3 
of 
the 
Bihar 
and 
West 
Bengal  
(Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956, and the territories 
specified in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) of section 
3 of the first mentioned Act 2[and the territories 
specified in section 3 of the Bihar Reorganisation  Act, 
2000].]
3[4. Gujarat
The territories referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3 of 
the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960.]
5. Kerala
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 5 
of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
6. Madhya
Pradesh
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of   section 9 of 
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 4[and the First 
Schedule to the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer 
of Territories) Act, 1959], 5[but excluding the territories 
specified in section 3 of the Madhya Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2000].
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968                 
(24 of 1968), s. 4, for the former entry (w.e.f. 10-6-1970).
2. Added by the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 (30 of 2000), s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-11-
2000).
3. Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation  Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
4. Ins. by the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959 
(47 of 1959), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-10-1959).
5. Added by the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (28 of 2000), s. 5 
(w.e.f. 1-11-2000).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
255
1[7. Tamil Nadu]
 
 
The 
territories 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement 
of 
this 
Constitution were either 
comprised in the Province  of Madras or were being 
administered as  if they formed part of that Province and 
the territories specified in section 4 of the States 
Reorganisation  Act, 1956, 2[and the Second Schedule to 
the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of 
Boundaries) Act, 1959], but excluding the territories 
specified in sub-section 
(1) of section 3 
and 
sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Andhra State Act, 1953 
and 3[the territories specified in clause (b) of sub-section 
(1) of section 5, section 6 and clause (d) of sub-section 
(1) of section 7 of the States Reorganisation  Act, 1956 
and 
the 
territories 
specified 
in 
the  
First Schedule to the Andhra Pradesh and Madras  
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959.]
4[8. Maharashtra
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 8 
of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, but excluding 
the territories referred to in sub-section (1) of section 3 
of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960.]
5[6[9.] 
Karnataka]
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 7 
of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 7[but excluding 
the territory specified in the Schedule to the Andhra 
Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 5, 
for "7. Madras" (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).
2. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 
(56 of 1959), s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-4-1960).
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1-4-1960).
4. Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation  Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
5. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 5, for 
"9. Mysore" (w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
6. Entries 8 to 14 renumbered as entries 9 to 15 by the Bombay Reorganisation  Act, 
1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
7. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh and Mysore (Transfer of Territory) Act, 1968 (36 of 
1968), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-10-1968).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
256
1[10.] 2[Odisha] 
The 
territories 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised 
in the Province of Orissa or were being administered as if 
they formed part of that Province. 
1[11.]
Punjab
The territories specified  in section 11 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956 3[and the territories referred 
to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Acquired 
Territories (Merger) Act, 1960]
4[but excluding the 
territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to 
the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960] 5[and 
the territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3, 
section 4 and sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Punjab 
Reorganisation Act, 1966.]
1[12.]
Rajasthan 
The territories specified in section 10 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956 6[but excluding the territories 
specified in the First Schedule to the Rajasthan and 
Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959].
______________________________________________
1. Entries 8 to 14 renumbered as entries 9 to 15 by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 
1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
2. Subs. by the Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011), s. 6, for "Orissa" 
(w.e.f. 1-11-2011).
3. Ins. by the Acquired Territories (Merger) Act, 1960 (64 of 1960), s. 4 
(w.e.f. 17-1-1961).
4. Added by the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, s. 3 (w.e.f. 17-1-1961).
5. Added by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1966).
6. Ins. by the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959
(47 of 1959), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-10-1959).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
257
1[13.] Uttar 
Pradesh 
2[The 
territories 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised 
in the Province known as the United  Provinces or were 
being administered as if they formed part of that Province, 
the territories specified in 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of 
Boundaries) Act, 1968, and the territories specified in 
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana 
and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979, 
but excluding the territories specified in clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968, 3[and the territories 
specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation 
Act, 2000] and the territories specified in clause (a) of sub-
section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979.]
1[14.] West 
Bengal
The 
territories 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement of this Constitution were either comprised 
in the Province of West Bengal or were being administered 
as if they formed part of that Province and the territory of 
Chandernagore as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of 
the Chandernagore (Merger) Act, 1954 and also the 
territories specified  in sub-section (1) of section 3 of the 
Bihar and West Bengal (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1956 
4[and also the territories referred to in Part III of the First 
Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in Part III of 
the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth 
Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained 
in clause (c) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth 
Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the territories 
referred to in Part III of the First Schedule and the territories 
referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the 
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.]
______________________________________________
1. Entries 8 to 14 renumbered as entries 9 to 15 by the  the Bombay Reorganisation  Act, 
1960 (11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
2. Subs. by the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979 (31 of 
1979), s. 5, for the entry against "13. Uttar Pradesh" (w.e.f. 15-9-1983).
3. Ins. by the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (29 of 2000), s. 5 (w.e.f. 9-11-2000).
4. Added by the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, s. 3
(w.e.f. 31-7-2015). For the text of the Act, see Appendix I.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
258
1[2[**
*                            *                          *]]
3[4[15.]
Nagaland 
The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 
of the State of Nagaland Act, 1962.]
3[5[16.]
Haryana
6[The territories specified in sub-section (1) of section 3 
of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 and the 
territories specified in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of 
section  4 of the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration 
of Boundaries) Act, 1979, but excluding the territories 
specified in clause (v) of  sub-section (1) of section 4 of 
that Act.]] 
 3[7[17.]
Himachal 
Pradesh
The 
territories 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement of this Constitution were being 
administered as if they were Chief Commissioners’ 
Provinces under the names of  Himachal Pradesh and 
Bilaspur and the territories specified  in sub-section (1) 
of section 5 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.]
3[8[18.]
Manipur
The 
territory 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement 
of 
this 
Constitution 
was 
being 
administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner’s 
Province under the name of Manipur.]
______________________________________________
1. **Entry 15 relating to Jammu and Kashmir deleted by the Jammu and Kashmir  
Reorganisation  Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
2. Entries 8 to 14 renumbered as 9 to 15 by the Bombay Reorganisation  Act, 1960   
(11 of 1960), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
3. Entries 16 to 29 renumbered as entries 15 to 28 by the Jammu and Kashmir  
Reorganisation  Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
4 Ins. by the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 (27 of 1962), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).
5. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1966)
and the entry therein subsequently amended by the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh 
(Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979 (31 of 1979), s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-9-1983).
6. Subs. by the Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1979 
(31 of 1979), s. 5, for the entry against "17. Haryana" (w.e.f. 15-9-1983).
7. Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
8. Ins. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 9 
(w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
259
1[19.] Tripura
 
 
The 
territory 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement 
of 
this 
Constitution 
was 
being 
administered as if it were a Chief Commissioner’s 
Province under the name of Tripura 2[and the territories 
referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the 
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, 
notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of 
section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 
1960, so far as it relates to the territories referred to in 
Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution (One 
Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.] 
1[20.] Meghalaya
The territories specified in section 5 of the North-Eastern 
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971] 2[and the territories referred to 
in Part I of the First Schedule but excluding the territories 
referred to in Part II of the Second Schedule to the Constitution 
(One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.]
1[3[21.] Sikkim
The territories which immediately before the commencement of 
the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, were 
comprised in Sikkim.]
1[4[22.] Mizoram
The territories specified in section 6 of the North-Eastern 
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.]
1[5[23.] Arunachal 
Pradesh 
The territories specified in section 7 of the North-Eastern 
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971.]
1[6[24.] Goa
The territories specified in section 3 of  the Goa, Daman and 
Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987.]
______________________________________________
1. Entries 16 to 29 renumbered as entries 15 to 28 by the Jammu and Kashmir  
Reorganisation  Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
2. Added by the  Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015, s. 3
(w.e.f. 31-7-2015). For the text of the Act, see Appendix I.
3. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
4. Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5. Ins. by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 4 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
6. Ins. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 5 
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
260
1[2[25.] Chhattisgarh
The territories specified in section 3 of the Madhya 
Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.] 
1[3[26.] 4[Uttarakhand] 
The territories specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh   
Reorganisation Act, 2000.] 
1[5[27.] Jharkhand 
The territories specified in section 3 of the Bihar 
Reorganisation Act, 2000.] 
1[6[28.] Telangana
The territories specified in section 3 of the Andhra 
Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.] 
II. THE UNION TERRITORIES
Name
Extent
1. Delhi
The 
territory 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement of this Constitution was comprised in the 
Chief Commissioner’s Province of Delhi.
7[*
*
*
*
*]
8[2.] The Andaman 
and Nicobar 
Islands 
The 
territory 
which 
immediately 
before 
the 
commencement of  this Constitution was comprised in 
the Chief  Commissioner’s Province  of   the   
Andaman    and  Nicobar Islands.      
______________________________________________
1. Entries 16 to 29 renumbered as entries 15 to 28 by the Jammu and Kashmir  
Reorganisation  Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
2. Added by the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (28 of 2000), 
s. 5 (w.e.f. 1-11-2000).
3. Ins. by the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (29 of 2000), s. 5 (w.e.f. 9-11-2000).
4. Subs. by the Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (52 of 2006), s. 4, for the 
word "Uttaranchal" (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
5. Added by the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 (30 of 2000), s. 5 (w.e.f. 15-11-
2000).
6. Ins. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, s. 10 (w.e.f. 2-6-2014). 
7. Entry 2 relating to "Himachal Pradesh" omitted and entries 3 to 10 renumbered as 
entries 2 to 9 respectively by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), 
s. 4 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971) and subsequently entries relating to Manipur and Tripura (i.e. 
entries 2 and 3) omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 
of 1971) s. 9 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
8. Entries 4 to 9 renumbered as entries 2 to 7 by the North-Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 9 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
261
 
1[3.] 2[Lakshadweep] 
The territory specified in section 6 of the States   
Reorganisation Act, 1956. 
3[1[4.] Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli 
and Daman 
and Diu
 
 
The territory  which  immediately  before   the 
eleventh day of August, 1961 was comprised in 
Free Dadra  and    Nagar  Haveli and the territories 
specified in section 4 of the Goa, Daman and Diu 
Reorganisation Act, 1987.] 
4[1[*]3[
*                        *                       *
*]
5[1[6.] 6[Puducherry] 
The territories which immediately before the   
sixteenth day of August, 1962, were comprised in 
the French Establishments in India known as 
Pondicherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam.]
7[1[7.] Chandigarh
The territories specified in section 4 of the Punjab  
Reorganisation Act, 1966.]
______________________________________________
1. Entries 4 to 9  renumbered as entries 2 to 7 (respectively) by the North-Eastern 
Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 9 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Subs. by the Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands (Alteration of Name) Act, 
1973 (34 of 1973), s. 5, for "The Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindivi Islands" 
(w.e.f. 1-11-1973).
3. Entry 4 relating to Dadra and Nagar Haveli was ins. by the Constitution (Tenth 
Amendment) Act, 1961, s.2 (w.e.f. 11-8-1961). And subsequently subs. by the 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli Daman and Diu (Merger of Union territories) Act, 2019 
(44 of 2019), s. 5 for entries 4 and 5 (w.e.f. 19-12-2019). 
4. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu (Reorganisation) Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 5, for 
entry 5 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Fourteenth Amendment) Act, 1962, s. 3 (with retrospective 
effect).
6.  Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006), s. 5 for 
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
7. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-11-1966).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(First Schedule)
         
Name
Territories
 
262
1[* 
            *  
*
             *                     *]  
1[* 
            *  
*
             *                     *]  
 
2[8. Jammu and 
Kashmir
The territories specified in section 4 of the Jammu 
and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.
9. Ladakh
The territories specified in section 3 of the Jammu 
and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.] 
 
______________________________________________
1. Entry 8 relating to Mizoram omitted and entry 9 relating to Arunachal Pradesh 
renumbered as entry 8 by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 4 
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987) and entry 8 relating to Arunachal Pradesh omitted by the State of 
Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986) s. 4 (w.e.f. 15-4-1987).
2.Ins. by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019)
s. 6 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).

263
SECOND SCHEDULE
[Articles 59(3), 65(3), 75(6), 97, 125, 148(3), 158(3), 164 (5), 186 and 221] 
PART A 
PROVISIONS AS TO THE PRESIDENT AND THE GOVERNORS OF STATES 1***
1. There shall be paid to the President and to the Governors of the States
1***  the following emoluments per mensem, that is to say:—
The President
……                10,000 rupees .
The Governor of a State     ……   
5,500 rupees .
2. There shall also be paid to the President and to the Governors of the 
States 2***  such allowances as were payable respectively to the Governor-
General of the Dominion of India and to the Governors of the corresponding 
Provinces immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
3. The President and the Governors of 3[the States] throughout their respective 
terms of office shall be entitled to the same privileges to which the Governor-
General and the Governors of the corresponding Provinces were respectively 
entitled immediately before the commencement of this Constitution.
4. While the Vice-President or any other person  is discharging the 
functions of, or is acting as, President, or any person is discharging the 
functions of the Governor,  he shall be entitled to the same emoluments, 
allowances and privileges as the President or the Governor whose functions he 
discharges or for whom he acts, as the case may be.
4*                           *                          * 
*                         *
______________________________________________
1. The words and letter "specified in Part A of the First Schedule" omitted by the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
Now five lakh rupees, vide the Finance Act, 2018 (13 of 2018), s. 137.
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
Now three lakh fifty thousand rupees, by s. 161, ibid., (w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
2. The words "so specified" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "such states" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Part B omitted by  s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Second Schedule) 
264
PART  C 
PROVISIONS AS TO THE SPEAKER AND THE DEPUTY SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE 
OF THE PEOPLE AND THE CHAIRMAN AND THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN
OF THE COUNCIL OF STATES AND THE SPEAKER AND THE
DEPUTY SPEAKER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 1***
AND THE CHAIRMAN AND THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN
OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF 2[A STATE] 
7. There shall be paid to the Speaker of the House of the People and the 
Chairman of the Council of States such salaries and allowances as were payable 
to the Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India 
immediately before the commencement of this Constitution, and there shall be 
paid to the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People and to the Deputy 
Chairman of the Council of States such salaries and allowances as were payable 
to the Deputy Speaker of the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of India 
immediately before such commencement.
8. There shall  be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the 
Legislative Assembly 3*** and to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of 
the Legislative Council of 4[a State] such salaries and allowances as were 
payable respectively to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly and the President and the Deputy President of the Legislative 
Council of the corresponding Province immediately before the commencement 
of this Constitution and, where the corresponding Province had no Legislative 
Council immediately before such commencement, there shall be paid to the 
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of the State 
such salaries and allowances as the Governor of the State may determine.
______________________________________________
1. The words and letter "OF A STATE IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE" 
omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch.         
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for “ANY SUCH STATE.” (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. The words and letter "of a State specified in Part A of the First Schedule" omitted by  
s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
4. Subs. by s. 29 and Sch., ibid., for "such State" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Second Schedule) 
265
PART D 
PROVISIONS AS TO THE JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT AND OF THE 
HIGH COURTS 1*** 
9. [(1) There shall be paid to the Judges of the Supreme Court, in respect of 
time spent on actual service, salary at the following rates per mensem, that is to say:—
The Chief Justice       ..
2[10,000 rupees.].
Any other Judge
..
3[9,000 rupees.].
Provided that if a Judge of the Supreme Court at the time of his 
appointment is in receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound 
pension) in respect of any previous service under the Government of India or 
any of its predecessor Governments or under the Government of a State or  any 
of its predecessor Governments, his salary in respect of service in the Supreme 
Court 4[shall be reduced—
(a) by the amount of that pension; and 
(b) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portion of 
the pension due to him in respect of such previous service the commuted 
value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension; and
(c) if he has, before such appointment, received a retirement gratuity in 
respect of such previous service, by the pension equivalent of that gratuity.]
(2) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be entitled without payment 
of rent to the use of an official residence.
(3) Nothing in sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph shall apply to a Judge 
who, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution,—
______________________________________________
1. The words and letter "IN STATES IN PART A OF THE FIRST SCHEDULE" omitted 
by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 25(a) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 4, for "5,000 rupees
to 10,000 rupees" (w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
Now two lakh eighty thousand rupees, vide the High Court and Supreme Court Judges 
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment
Act, 2018 (10 of 2018),  s. 6
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 4, for "4,000 rupees" 
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
Now two lakh fifty thousand rupees, vide the High Court and Supreme Court Judges 
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment
Act, 2018 (10 of 2018),  s. 6 
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 25(b), for " shall be 
reduced by the amount of that pension" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Second Schedule) 
266
(a) was holding office as the Chief Justice of the Federal Court and 
has become on such commencement the Chief Justice of the Supreme 
Court under  clause (1) of article 374; or
(b) was holding office as any other Judge of the Federal Court and 
has on such commencement become a Judge (other than the Chief 
Justice) of the Supreme Court under the said clause,
during the period he holds office as such Chief Justice or other Judge, and 
every Judge who so becomes the Chief Justice or other Judge of the Supreme 
Court shall, in  respect of time spent on actual service as such Chief Justice or 
other Judge, as the case may be, be entitled to receive in addition to the salary 
specified in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph as special pay an amount 
equivalent to the difference between the salary so specified and the salary 
which he was drawing immediately before such commencement.
(4) Every Judge of the Supreme Court shall receive such reasonable 
allowances to reimburse him for expenses incurred in travelling on duty within 
the territory of India and shall be afforded such reasonable facilities in 
connection with travelling as the President may from time to time prescribe.
(5) The rights in respect of leave of absence (including leave allowances) 
and pension of the Judges of the Supreme Court shall be governed by the 
provisions which, immediately before the commencement of this Constitution,  
were applicable to the Judges of the Federal Court.
10. (1) 1[There shall be paid to the Judges of High Courts, in respect of time 
spent on actual service, salary at the following rates per mensem, that is to say,—
The Chief Justice        ..
2[9,000 rupees]  
Any other Judge
..
3[8,000 rupees]:  
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 25(c), (i), for 
sub-paragraph (1) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 4, for "4,000 rupees" 
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
Now two lakh fifty thousand rupees, vide the High Court and Supreme Court Judges 
(Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment
Act, 2018 (10 of 2018), s. 2 
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Fifty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1986, s. 4, for "3,500 rupees" 
(w.e.f. 1-4-1986).
Now two lakh twenty-five thousand rupees, vide the High Court and Supreme Court 
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2018 (10 of 2018), s. 2
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Second Schedule) 
267
Provided that if a Judge of a High Court at the  time of his appointment is in 
receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any 
previous service under the Government of India or any of its predecessor 
Governments or under  the Government of a State or any of its predecessor 
Governments, his salary in respect of service in the High Court shall be reduced—
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he has, before such appointment, received in lieu of a portion of 
the pension due to him in respect of such previous service the commuted 
value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension; and
(c) if he has, before such appointment, received a retirement gratuity in 
respect of such previous service, by the pension equivalent of that 
gratuity.]
(2) Every person who immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution— 
(a) was holding office as the Chief Justice of a High Court in any 
Province and has on such commencement become the Chief Justice of the 
High Court in the corresponding State under clause (1) of article 376; or
(b) was holding office as any other Judge of a High Court in any Province 
and has on such commencement become a Judge (other than the Chief 
Justice) of the High Court in the corresponding State under the said clause,
shall, if he was immediately before such commencement drawing a salary at a 
rate higher than that specified in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, be 
entitled to receive in respect of time spent on actual service as such Chief 
Justice or other Judge, as the case may be, in addition to the salary specified in 
the said sub-paragraph as special pay an amount equivalent to the difference 
between the salary so specified and the salary which he was drawing 
immediately before such commencement.
1[(3) Any person who, immediately before the commencement of the 
Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, was holding office as the Chief 
Justice of the High Court of  a State specified in Part B of the First Schedule 
and has on such commencement become the Chief Justice of the High Court of 
a State specified in the said Schedule as amended by the said Act, shall, if he 
was immediately before such commencement drawing any amount as 
allowance in addition to his salary, be entitled to receive in respect of time 
spent on actual service as such Chief Justice, the same amount as allowance in 
addition to the salary specified in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.].
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 25(c), (ii), for
sub-paragraphs (3) and (4) (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Second Schedule) 
268
11. In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) the expression “Chief Justice” includes an acting Chief Justice, 
and a “Judge” includes an ad hoc Judge; 
(b) “actual service” includes— 
(i) time spent by a Judge on duty as a Judge or in the performance 
of such other functions as he may at the request of the President 
undertake to discharge;
(ii) vacations, excluding any time during which the Judge is absent 
on leave; and
(iii) joining time on transfer from a High Court to the Supreme 
Court or from one High Court to another. 
PART E
PROVISIONS AS TO THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR-GENERAL OF INDIA 
12. (1) There shall be paid to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India a salary at the rate of *four thousand rupees per mensem.
(2) The person who was holding office immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution as Auditor-General of India and has 
become on such commencement the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
under article 377 shall in addition to the salary specified in sub-paragraph (1) of 
this paragraph be entitled to receive as special pay an amount equivalent to the 
difference between the salary so specified and the salary which he was drawing 
as Auditor-General of India immediately before such commencement.
(3) The rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and the other 
conditions of service of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be 
governed or shall continue to be governed, as the case may be, by the provisions 
which were applicable to the Auditor-General of India immediately before the 
commencement of this Constitution and all references in those provisions to the 
Governor-General shall be construed as references to the President.
______________________________________________
* The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India shall be paid a salary equal to 
the salary of the Judges of the Supreme Court vide s. 3 of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 (56 of 
1971) .  The salary of Judges of the Supreme Court has been raised to two 
lakh fifty thousand rupees per mensem by the High Court and Supreme Court 
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2018 (10 of 2018), s. 6 
(w.e.f. 1-1-2016).

269
THIRD SCHEDULE
[Articles 75(4), 99, 124(6), 148(2), 164(3), 188 and 219]   
Forms  of  Oaths  or Affirmations 
I
Form of oath of office for a Minister for the Union:—
“I,   A. B.,  do  swear   in   the  name   of   God  that I will bear true faith
                                  solemnly affirm   
and allegiance to  the  Constitution of India as by law established, 1[that I 
will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will faithfully 
and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the Union and 
that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with the 
Constitution and the law, without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”
II
Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for the Union:—
“I,   A.B.,  do swear  in  the  name  of  God that  I  will  not  directly  or
solemnly affirm
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter 
which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known 
to me as a Minister for the Union except as may be required for the due 
discharge of my duties as such Minister.”
2[III
A
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to 
Parliament:—
______________________________________________
See also arts. 84 (a) and 173 (a).
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for Form III. (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Third Schedule) 
270
“I, A.B., having been nominated as a  candidate  to  fill  a  seat in the  
Council  of  States (or  the  House of  the People) do swear in the name of   God   
solemnly affirm
that I will bear true  faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as 
by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of 
India.” 
B
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of  Parliament:—
“I,  A.B., having been elected  (or  nominated)  a member of  the 
Council  of  States  (or  the House of  the People) do swear in  the name of  God   
                                                                                   solemnly affirm
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by 
law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India 
and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to 
enter.”]
IV
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of the Supreme 
Court and the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India:—
“I, A.B., having been appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of  the 
Supreme Court of  India  (or Comptroller and Auditor-General  of  
India)  do  swear  in  the  name  of   God that I  will  bear  true  faith and
solemnly affirm
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 
1[that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will 
duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and 
judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, 
affection or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.” 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Third Schedule) 
271
V 
Form of oath of office for a Minister for a State:—
“I, A.B.,  do swear  in  the  name  of  God that  I  will   bear   true  faith   
solemnly affirm
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, 1[that I 
will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that I will faithfully 
and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister for the State of 
..........and that I will do right to all manner of people in accordance with 
the Constitution and the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will.”
VI
Form of oath of secrecy for a Minister for a State:— 
  “I,  A.B.,  do  swear  in  the  name   of   God that I  will  not  directly or 
                            solemnly affirm
indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or persons any matter 
which shall be brought under my consideration or shall become known to 
me as a Minister for the State of ....................except as may be required for 
the due discharge of my duties as such Minister.”  
2[VII
A
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for election to the 
Legislature of a State:—
“I,  A.B.,  having  been  nominated  as  a  candidate  to fill  
a seat  in  the  Legislative  Assembly  (or  Legislative  Council),  
do swear  in the name  of  God that  I  will  bear  true  faith  and  
solemnly affirm
allegiance  to  the Constitution of India as by law established and that I 
will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India.”
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for Form VII (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Third Schedule) 
272
B
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a member of the Legislature 
of a State:—
“I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the Legislative 
Assembly (or Legislative Council), do swear in the name of God that
solemnly affirm
I  will  bear true  faith  and  allegiance to the Constitution of India as by 
law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India 
and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to 
enter.”]
VIII 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Judges of a High Court:—
“I, A.B., having  been  appointed Chief Justice (or a Judge) of the High 
Court at (or  of) ……….….. do swear  in  the  name  of  God that  I will  bear
solemnly affirm
true  faith  and  allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law 
established, 1[that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India,] that 
I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and 
judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection 
or ill-will and that I will uphold the Constitution and the laws.”
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 5 (w.e.f. 5-10-1963).

 
273
1[FOURTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 4(1) and 80(2)] 
Allocation of seats in the Council of States
To each State or Union territory specified in the first column of  the 
following table, there shall be allotted the number of seats specified in the 
second column thereof opposite to that State or that Union territory, as the case 
may be: 
TABLE
 1.
Andhra Pradesh ...................................................
2[11]
3[2.
Telangana ...........................................................
7]
4[3.]
Assam .................................................................
7
4[4.]
Bihar ...................................................................
5[16]
6[4[5.]
Jharkhand ............................................................
6]
7[8[4[6.]
Goa .....................................................................
1]]
9[8[4[7.]
Gujarat ................................................................
11]]
10[8[4[8.]
Haryana ..............................................................
5]]
8[4[9.]
Kerala .................................................................
9
______________________________________________
1. Fourth Schedule Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 3(2), 
for ‘Fourth Schedule’ (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2.  Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, s. 12, for “18” (w.e.f.  2-6-2014).
3.  Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f.  2-6-2014).
4.  Entries 2 to 30 renumbered as entries 3 to 31 respectively by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f.  2-6-2014).
5.  Subs. by the Bihar Reorganisation  Act, 2000 (30 of 2000), s. 7, for "22" (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
6.  Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
7.  Entries 4 to 26 renumbered as entries 5 to 27 respectively and entry “4 Goa….1” ins. 
by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 6(a) and (b) 
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987). 
8.  Entries 4 to 29 renumbered as entries 5 to 30 by  the Bihar Reorganisation  Act, 2000 
(30 of 2000), s. 7 (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
9. Subs. by the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 6, for entry "4"
(w.e.f.1-5-1960).
10. Ins. by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-11-1966).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Fourth Schedule) 
274
1[2[10.]]
Madhya Pradesh ..................................................
3[11]
4[1[2[11.]
Chhattisgarh ........................................................
5]]
5[1[2[12.]
Tamil Nadu .........................................................
6[18]]
7[1[2[13.]
Maharashtra ........................................................
19]]
8[1[2[14.]
Karnataka ............................................................
12]]
1[2[15.]
9[Odisha] .............................................................
10]
1[2[16.]
Punjab .................................................................
10[7]
1[2[17.]
Rajasthan ............................................................
10]
1[2[18.]
Uttar Pradesh ....................................................... 11[31]
12[1[2[19.]
13[Uttarakhand] ....................................................
3]]
1[2[20.]
West Bengal ........................................................
16]
14[1[2[**
*        *          *......................................................
*]
15[16[1[2[21.]
Nagaland .............................................................
1]]
______________________________________________
1. Entries 4 to 29 renumbered as entries 5 to 30 by  the Bihar Reorganisation  Act, 2000 
(30 of 2000), s. 7 (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
2. Entries 2 to 30 renumbered as entries 3 to 31 respectively by the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2014, s. 12 (w.e.f. 2-6-2014).
3. Subs. by the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (28 of 2000), s. 7, for "16" 
(w.e.f. 1-11-2000).   
4.  Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-2000).
5. Subs. by the Madras State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1968 (53 of 1968), s. 5, for "8. 
Madras" (renumbered as *11) (w.e.f. 14-1-1969).
6.  Subs. by the Andhra Pradesh and Madras (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1959 
(56 of 1959), s. 8, for "17" (w.e.f. 1-4-1960).
7. Ins. by the Bombay Reorganisation  Act, 1960 (11 of 1960), s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-5-1960).
8. Subs. by the Mysore State (Alteration of Name) Act, 1973 (31 of 1973), s. 5, for "10. 
Mysore" (w.e.f. 1-11-1973). 
9. Subs. by the Orissa (Alteration of Name) Act, 2011 (15 of 2011), s. 7 for "Orissa" 
(w.e.f. 1-11-2011).
10. Subs. by the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (31 of 1966), s. 9 for "11"
(w.e.f. 1-11-1966). 
11. Subs. by the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 (29 of 2000), s. 7 for "34"
(w.e.f. 9-11-2000).
12. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 9-11-2000).
13. Subs. by the Uttaranchal (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (52 of 2006), s. 5 for 
"Uttaranchal" (w.e.f. 1-1-2007).
14. ** Entry 21 relating to Jammu and Kashmir deleted by the Jammu and Kashmir 
Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 8 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
15. Entries 22 to 31 re-numbered as entries 21 to 30, respectively by the Jammu and 
Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 8 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
16. Ins. by the State of Nagaland Act, 1962 (27 of 1962), s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-12-1963).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Fourth Schedule) 
275
1[2[3[4[22.] 
Himachal Pradesh  ................................................
3]]]
3[2[4[23.] 
Manipur ..............................................................
1]
3[2[4[24.] 
Tripura ................................................................
1]]
3[2[4[25.] 
Meghalaya ..........................................................
1]]
5[3[2[4[26.] 
Sikkim  ................................................................
1]]
6[3[2[4[27.] 
Mizoram  .............................................................
1]]
7[3[2[4[28.]
Arunachal Pradesh ...............................................
1]]
3[2[4[29.] 
Delhi  ...................................................................
3]
3[2[4[30.]
8[Puducherry] ......................................................
1]]
9[3[2[4[31.
Jammu and Kashmir.............................................
4]
Total
10[233]
 
 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the State of Himachal Pradesh Act, 1970 (53 of 1970), s. 5 (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
2. Entries 4 to 29 renumbered as entries 5 to 30 by  the Bihar Reorganisation  Act, 2000 
(30 of 2000), s. 7 (w.e.f. 15-11-2000).
3. Entries 2 to 30 renumbered as entries 3 to 31 respectively by the Andhra Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2014 (6 of 2014), s. 12 (w.e.f.  2-6-2014).
4. Entries 22 to 31 renumbered as entries 21 to 30 respectively by the Jammu and 
Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 8 (w.e.f. 31-10-2019).
5. Ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-sixth Amenement) Act, 1975, s. 4 (w.e.f. 26-4-1975).
6. Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
7. Ins. by the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986 (69 of 1986), s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
8. Subs. by the Pondicherry (Alteration of Name) Act, 2006 (44 of 2006) s. 4, for 
"Pondicherry" (w.e.f. 1-10-2006).
9. Ins. by the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019), s. 8 
(w.e.f. 31-10-2019). 
10. Subs. by the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987 (18 of 1987), s. 6, for 
"232" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

276
FIFTH SCHEDULE
[Article 244(1)] 
Provisions as to the Administration and Control of Scheduled Areas and 
Scheduled Tribes
PART A 
GENERAL
1. Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise 
requires, the expression “State” 1*** does not include the 2[States of Assam
3[, 4[Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram.]]]
2. Executive power of a State in Scheduled Areas.—Subject to the 
provisions of this Schedule, the executive power of a State extends to the 
Scheduled Areas therein.
3. Report by the Governor
5*** to the President regarding the 
administration of Scheduled Areas.—The  Governor 5*** of each State having 
Scheduled Areas therein shall annually, or whenever so required by the President, 
make a report to the President regarding the administration of the Scheduled 
Areas in that State and the executive power of the Union shall extend to the 
giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the said areas.
PART B
ADMINISTRATION AND CONTROL OF SCHEDULED AREAS AND 
SCHEDULED TRIBES
4. Tribes Advisory Council.—(1) There shall be established in each 
State having Scheduled Areas therein and, if the President so directs, also in 
any State having Scheduled Tribes but not Scheduled Areas therein, a Tribes 
Advisory Council consisting of not more than twenty members of whom, as 
nearly as may be, three-fourths shall be the representatives of the Scheduled 
Tribes in the Legislative Assembly of the State:
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "means a State specified in Part A or  Part B of the First 
Schedule but" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and 
Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71, for
"State of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).  
3. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 3, for "and 
Meghalaya" (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
4. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39,  for "Meghalaya and 
Tripura" (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
5. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Fifth Schedule) 
277
Provided that if the number of representatives of the Scheduled Tribes in 
the Legislative Assembly of the State is less than the number of seats in the 
Tribes Advisory Council to be filled by such representatives, the remaining 
seats shall be filled by other members of those tribes.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Tribes Advisory Council to advise on such 
matters pertaining to the welfare and advancement of the Scheduled Tribes in 
the State as may be referred to them by the Governor 1***.
(3) The Governor 2*** may make rules prescribing or regulating, as the 
case may be,—
(a) the number of members of the Council, the mode of their 
appointment and the appointment of the Chairman of the Council and of 
the officers and servants thereof;
(b) the conduct of its meetings and its procedure in general; and
(c) all other incidental matters.
5. Law applicable to Scheduled Areas.—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
in this Constitution, the Governor 1*** may by public notification direct that 
any particular Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall not 
apply to a Scheduled Area or  any part thereof in the State or shall apply to a 
Scheduled Area or any part thereof in the State subject to such exceptions and 
modifications as he may specify in the notification and any direction given 
under this sub-paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective effect.
(2) The Governor may make regulations for the peace and good 
government of any area in a State which is for the time being a Scheduled Area.
In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may—
(a) prohibit or restrict the transfer of land by or among members 
of the Scheduled Tribes in such area;
(b) regulate the allotment of land to members of the Scheduled 
Tribes in such area;
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh, as the case may be" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh 
Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by s. 29 and Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Fifth Schedule) 
278
(c) regulate the carrying on of business as money-lender by 
persons who lend money to members of the Scheduled Tribes in such 
area.
(3) In making any such regulation as is referred to in sub-paragraph (2) 
of this paragraph, the Governor
1*** may repeal or amend any Act of 
Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or any existing law which is for the 
time being applicable to the area in question.
(4) All regulations made under this paragraph shall be submitted 
forthwith to the President and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.
(5) No regulation shall be made under this paragraph unless the 
Governor21*** making the regulation has, in the case where there is a Tribes 
Advisory Council for the State, consulted such Council.
PART C
SCHEDULED AREAS
6. Scheduled Areas.—(1) In this Constitution, the expression 
“Scheduled Areas” means such areas as the President may by order declare to 
be Scheduled Areas. 
(2) The President may at any time by order —
(a) direct that the whole or any specified part of a Scheduled Area 
shall cease to be a Scheduled Area or a part of such an area;
 2[(aa) increase the area of any Scheduled Area in a State after 
consultation with the Governor of that State;]
(b) alter, but only by way of rectification of boundaries, any 
Scheduled Area;
______________________________________________
1. The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
The words "or Rajpramukh" omitted by s. 29 and sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
See the Scheduled Areas (Part A States) Order, 1950 (C.O. 9), the Scheduled Areas 
(Part B States) Order, 1950 (C.O.26), the Scheduled Areas (Himachal Pradesh) Order, 
1975 (C.O. 102) and the Scheduled Areas (States of Bihar, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh 
and Orissa) Order, 1977 (C.O. 109).
See the Madras Scheduled Areas (Cessor) Order, 1950 (C.O. 30) and the Andhra 
Scheduled Areas (Cessor) Order, 1955 (C.O. 50).
2. Ins. by the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1976 (101 of 1976), 
s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-1976).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Fifth Schedule) 
279
(c) on any alteration of the boundaries of a State or on the 
admission into the Union or the establishment of a new State, declare 
any territory not previously included in any State to be, or to form part 
of, a Scheduled Area;
1[(d) rescind, in relation to any State or States, any order or orders 
made under this paragraph, and in consultation with the Governor of the 
State concerned, make fresh orders redefining the areas which are to be 
Scheduled Areas;]
and any such order may contain such incidental and consequential provisions as 
appear to the President to be necessary and proper, but save as aforesaid, the 
order made under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall not be varied by 
any subsequent order. 
PART D
AMENDMENT OF THE SCHEDULE
7. Amendment of the Schedule.—(1) Parliament may from time to time 
by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of 
this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any reference to this 
Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such Schedule 
as so amended.
(2) No such law as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph 
shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the purposes of 
article 368.
 
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1976 (101 of 1976), 
s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-1976).

280
SIXTH SCHEDULE 
[Articles 244(2) and 275(1)]
Provisions as to the Administration of Tribal Areas in  1[the States of 
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram]
21. Autonomous districts and autonomous regions.—(1) Subject to 
the provisions of this paragraph, the tribal areas in each item of 3[4[Parts I, II 
and IIA] and in Part III] of the table appended to paragraph 20 of this 
Schedule shall be an autonomous district.
(2) If there are different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district, 
the Governor may, by public notification, divide the area or areas inhabited 
by them into autonomous regions.
(3) The Governor may, by public notification,—
(a) include any area in 3[any of the Parts] of the said table; 
(b) exclude any area from 3[any of the Parts] of the said table;
(c) create a new autonomous district;
(d) increase the area of any autonomous district;
(e) diminish the area of any autonomous district;
(f) unite two or more autonomous districts or parts thereof so 
as to form one autonomous district;
5[(ff) alter the name of any autonomous district];
(g) define the boundaries of any autonomous district:
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for certain words 
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
2.  Paragraph 1 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, so as to 
insert the following proviso after sub-paragraph (2), namely :—
"Provided that nothing in this sub-paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland 
Territorial Areas District" (w.e.f. 7-9-2003).
3. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) 
and Eighth Sch., for "Part A" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).  
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4, for "Part I and 
II" (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
5. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
281
Provided that no order shall be made by the Governor under clauses (c), 
(d), (e) and (f) of this sub-paragraph except after consideration of the report of 
a Commission appointed under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 14 of this 
Schedule: 
1[Provided further that any order made by the Governor under this 
sub-paragraph may contain such incidental and consequential provisions 
(including any amendment of paragraph 20 and of any item in any of the 
Parts of the said Table) as appear to the Governor to be necessary for giving 
effect to the provisions of the order.]
22. Constitution of District Councils  and  Regional Councils.—
3[(1) There shall be a District Council for each autonomous district   
consisting of not more than thirty members, of whom not more than four 
persons shall be nominated by the Governor and the rest shall be elected on 
the basis of adult suffrage.]
______________________________________________
 
1. Ins. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and 
Eighth Sch. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Paragraph 2 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by  the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003(44 of 2003), s. 2, so as to insert 
the following proviso after sub-paragraph (1), namely: —
“Provided that the Bodoland Territorial Council shall consist of not more than 
forty-six members of whom forty shall be elected on the basis of adult suffrage, of 
whom thirty shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes, five for non-tribal 
communities, five open for all communities and the remaining six shall be nominated 
by the Governor having same rights and privileges as other members, including voting 
rights, from amongst the un-represented communities of the Bodoland Territorial 
Areas District, of which at least two shall be women:”
Paragraph 2 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995(42 of 1995), s.2, so as to insert the 
following proviso  after sub-paragraph (3), namely :—
“Provided that the District Council constituted for the North Cachar Hills 
District shall be called as the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the 
District Council constituted for the Karbi Anglong District shall be called as the 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council.”
Paragraph 2 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by  the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003(44 of 2003), s. 2, so as to insert 
the following proviso after sub-paragraph (3), namely:—
“Provided further that the District Council constituted for the Bodoland
Territorial Areas District shall be called the Bodoland Territorial Council.” 
3. Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch., for sub-paraghaph (1) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
282
(2) There shall be a separate Regional Council for each area 
constituted an autonomous region under sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 1 of 
this Schedule. 
(3) Each District Council and each Regional Council shall be a body 
corporate by the name respectively of “the District Council of (name of 
district)” and “the Regional Council of (name of region)”, shall have 
perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and 
be sued.
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Schedule, the administration of 
an autonomous district shall, in so far as it is not vested under this Schedule 
in any Regional Council within such district, be vested in the District 
Council for such district and the administration of an autonomous region 
shall be vested in the Regional Council for such region.
(5) In an autonomous district with Regional Councils, the District 
Council shall have only such powers with respect to the areas under the 
authority of the Regional Council as may be delegated to it by the Regional 
Council in addition to the powers conferred on it by this Schedule with 
respect to such areas.
(6) The Governor shall make rules for the first constitution of District 
Councils and Regional Councils in consultation with the existing tribal 
Councils or other representative tribal organisations within the autonomous 
districts or regions concerned, and such rules shall provide for—
(a) the composition of the District Councils and Regional 
Councils and the allocation of seats therein;
(b) the delimitation of territorial constituencies for the purpose 
of elections to those Councils;
(c) the qualifications for voting at such elections and the 
preparation of electoral rolls therefor;
(d) the qualifications for being elected at such elections as 
members of such Councils;
(e) the term of office of members of 1[Regional Councils];
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch., for "such Councils" (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
283
(f) any other matter relating to or connected with elections or
nominations to such Councils; 
(g) the procedure and the conduct of business 1[(including the
power to act notwithstanding any vacancy)] in the District and 
Regional Councils;
(h) the appointment of officers and staff of the District and
Regional Councils. 
1[(6A) The elected members of the District Council shall hold office 
for a term of five years from the date appointed for the first meeting of the 
Council after the general elections to the Council, unless the District 
Council is sooner dissolved under paragraph 16 and a nominated member 
shall hold office at the pleasure of the Governor: 
Provided that the said period of five years may, while a Proclamation 
of Emergency is in operation or if circumstances exist which, in the opinion 
of the Governor, render the holding of elections impracticable, be extended 
by the Governor for a period not exceeding one year at a time and in any 
case where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation not extending 
beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to operate: 
Provided further that a member elected to fill a casual vacancy shall 
hold office only for the remainder of the term of office of the member 
whom he replaces.] 
(7) The District or the Regional Council may after its first
constitution make  rules 1[with the approval of the Governor] with regard to 
the matters specified in sub-paragraph (6) of this paragraph and may also 
make rules 1[with like approval] regulating—
(a) the formation of subordinate local Councils or Boards and
their procedure and the conduct of their business; and
(b) generally all matters relating to the transaction of business
pertaining to the administration of the district or region, as the case  
may be:
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
284
Provided that until rules are made by the District or the Regional 
Council under this sub-paragraph the rules made by the Governor under 
sub-paragraph (6) of this paragraph shall have effect in respect of elections 
to, the officers and staff of, and the procedure and the conduct of business 
in, each such Council.
1* 
 *
* 
* 
2-323. Powers of the District Councils and Regional Councils to
make laws.—(1) The Regional Council for an  autonomous region in 
______________________________________________
1. Second proviso omitted by s. 74 and Fourth Sch. of the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) 
Act, 1969 (55 of 1969) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
2. Paragraph 3 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, so as to substitute sub-paragraph (3) as 
under (w.e.f. 7-9-2003),— 
“(3) Save as otherwise provided in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 3A or sub-paragraph 
(2) of paragraph 3B, all laws made under this paragraph or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3A 
or sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3B shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until 
assented to by him, shall have no effect.” . 
After paragraph 3, the following paragraph has been inserted in its application to the State of 
Assam by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2, 
(w.e.f. 12-9-1995), namely: — 
“3A. Additional powers of the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the 
Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council to make laws.—(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of paragraph 3, the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Council within their respective districts, shall have power to make 
laws with respect to— 
(a)
industries, subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I of the Seventh 
Schedule; 
 (b) communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries and other means of 
communication not specified in List I of the Seventh Schedule; municipal tramways, 
ropeways, inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List I and 
List III of the Seventh Schedule with regard to such waterways; vehicles other than 
mechanically propelled vehicles; 
(c)
preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal 
diseases; veterinary training and practice; cattle pounds; 
(d) primary and secondary education; 
(e)
agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against pests 
and prevention of plant diseases; 
(f)
fisheries; 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
285
(Foot-note Continue),— 
(g)
water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and 
embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of entry 56 of 
List I of the Seventh Schedule;
(h)
social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment; 
(i)
flood control schemes for protection of villages, paddy fields, markets, towns, etc. 
(not of technical nature); 
(j)
theatre and dramatic performances, cinemas subject to the provisions of entry 60 of 
List I of the Seventh Schedule; sports, entertainments and amusements; 
(k)
public health and sanitation, hospitals and dispensaries; 
(l)
minor irrigation; 
(m) trade and commerce in, and the production supply and distribution of, food stuffs, 
cattle fodder, raw cotton and raw jute; 
(n)
libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or financed by the State; 
ancient and historical monuments and records other than those declared by or under 
any law made by Parliament to be of national importance; and 
(o) alienation of land. 
(2) All laws made by the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council and the Karbi Anglong 
Autonomous Council under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall, in so far as they relate to 
matters specified in List III of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the Governor 
who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President. 
(3) When a law is reserved for the consideration of the President, the President shall declare
either that he assents to the said law or that he  withholds assent therefrom: 
Provided that the President may direct the Governor to return the law to the North Cachar 
Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council, as the case may be, 
together with a message requesting that the said Council will reconsider the law or any 
specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will, consider the desirability of introducing any 
such amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when  the law is so returned, the  
said  Council shall consider the law accordingly within a period of six months from the date of 
receipt of such message and, if the law is again passed by the said Council with  or without 
amendment it shall be presented again to the President  for  his  consideration.". 
After paragraph 3A, the following paragraph has been inserted in its application to the State of Assam 
by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, (w.e.f. 7-9-
2003), namely:— 
3B. Additional powers of the Bodoland Territorial Council to make laws.—(1) Without 
prejudice to the provisions of paragraph 3, the Bodoland Territorial Council within its areas 
shall have power to make laws with respect to :—  
(i) agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection against 
pests and prevention of plant diseases;  (ii) animal husbandry and veterinary, that is to say, 
preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of animal diseases, 
veterinary training and practice, cattle pounds; (iii) co-operation;  (iv) cultural affairs;  (v)  
education, that is to say, primary education, higher secondary including vocational training, 
adult education, college education (general); (vi) fisheries;  (vii) flood control for protection 
of village, paddy fields, markets and towns (not of technical nature); (viii)  Food and civil 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
286
supply;  (ix) forests (other than reserved forests);  (x) handloom and textile;  (xi) health and 
family welfare, (xii) intoxicating liquors, opium and derivatives, subject to the provisions of 
entry 84 of List I  of the Seventh Schedule; (xiii) irrigation; (xiv)  labour and employment;  
(xv) land and revenue; (xvi) library services (financed and controlled by the State 
Government);  (xvii)  lotteries (subject to the provisions of entry 40 of List I of the Seventh 
Schedule), theatres, dramatic performances and cinemas (subject to the provisions of entry 
60 of List I of the Seventh Schedule); (xviii) markets and fairs; (xix) municipal corporation, 
improvement trust, district boards and other local authorities; (xx) museum and 
archaeology institutions controlled or financed by the State, ancient and historical 
monuments and records other than those declared by or under any law made by Parliament 
to be of national importance;  (xxi)  panchayat and rural development;  (xxii) planning and 
development;  (xxiii) printing and stationery; (xxiv) public health engineering; (xxv) public 
works department;  (xxvi)  publicity and public relations; (xxvii) registration of births and 
deaths;  (xxviii)  relief and rehabilitation;  (xxix) sericulture; (xxx)  small, cottage and rural 
industry subject to the provisions of entries 7 and 52 of List I of the Seventh Schedule;  
(xxxi)  social Welfare;  (xxxii)  soil conservation; (xxxiii)  sports and youth welfare;  
(xxxiv)  statistics;  (xxxv) tourism; (xxxvi) transport (roads, bridges, ferries and other 
means of communications not specified in List I of the Seventh Schedule, municipal 
tramways,   ropeways, inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provision of List 
I and List III of the Seventh Schedule with regard to such waterways, vehicles other than 
mechanically propelled vehicles);  (xxxvii)  tribal research institute controlled and financed 
by the State  Government; (xxxviii)   urban development—town  and country  planning;  
(xxxix) weights and measures subject to the provisions of entry 50 of List I of the  Seventh 
Schedule; and   (xl)  Welfare of plain tribes and backward classes:
Provided that nothing in such laws shall—
(a)  extinguish or modify the existing rights and privileges of any citizen 
in respect of his land at the date of commencement of this Act; and 
(b) disallow and citizen from acquiring land either by way of inheritance, 
allotment, settlement or by any other way of transfer if such citizen is otherwise 
eligible for such acquisition of land within the Bodoland Territorial Areas 
District.
(2) All laws made under paragraph 3 or under this paragraph shall in so far as they 
relate to matters specified in List III  of the Seventh Schedule, be submitted forthwith to the 
Governor who shall reserve the same for the consideration of the President. 
(3) When a law is reserved for the consideration of the President, the President shall 
declare  either that he assents to the said law or that he withholds assent therefrom:
Provided that the President may direct the Governor to return the law to the 
Bodoland Territorial Council, together with the message requesting that the said Council 
will reconsider the law or any specified provisions thereof and, in particular, will consider 
the desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recommend in his message 
and, when the law is so returned, the said Council shall consider the law accordingly within 
a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if the law is again 
passed by the said Council with or without amendments it shall be presented again to the 
President for his consideration.”.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
287
respect of all areas within such  region and the District Council for an 
autonomous district in respect of all areas within the district except those 
which are under the authority of Regional Councils, if any, within the 
district shall have power to make laws with respect to—
(a) the allotment, occupation or use, or the setting apart, of 
land, other  than any land which is a reserved forest for the purposes 
of agriculture or grazing or for residential or other non-agricultural 
purposes or  for  any  other  purpose likely to promote the interests of 
the inhabitants of any village or town: 
Provided that nothing in such laws shall prevent the 
compulsory acquisition of any land, whether occupied or unoccupied, 
for public purposes 1[by the Government of the State concerned] in 
accordance with the law for the time being in force authorising such 
acquisition; 
(b) the management of any forest not being a reserved forest;
(c) the use of any canal or water-course for the purpose of 
agriculture;
(d) the regulation of the practice of jhum or other forms of 
shifting cultivation;
(e) the establishment of village or town committees or councils 
and their powers;
(f) any other matter relating to village or town administration, 
including village or town police and public health and sanitation;
(g) the appointment or succession of Chiefs or Headmen;
(h) the inheritance of property;
 2[(i) marriage and divorce;] 
(j) social customs.
(2) In this paragraph, a “reserved forest” means any area which is a 
reserved forest under the Assam Forest Regulation, 1891, or under any other 
law for the time being in force in the area in question.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) 
and Eighth Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).  
2. Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch., for cl. (i) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
288
(3) All laws made under this paragraph shall be submitted forthwith 
to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no effect.
14. Administration of justice in autonomous districts and 
autonomous regions.—(1) The Regional Council for an autonomous region 
in respect of areas within such region and the District Council for an 
autonomous district in respect of areas within the district other than those 
which are under the authority of the Regional Councils, if any, within the 
district may constitute village councils or courts for the trial of suits and 
cases between  the parties all of whom belong to Scheduled Tribes within 
such areas, other than suits and cases  to which the provisions of             
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule  apply,  to the exclusion 
of any court in the State, and may appoint suitable persons to be members of 
such village councils or presiding officers of such courts, and may also 
appoint such officers as may be necessary for the administration of the laws 
made under paragraph 3 of this Schedule.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the Regional 
Council for an autonomous region or any court constituted in that behalf by 
the Regional Council or, if in respect of any area within an autonomous 
district there is no Regional Council, the District Council for such district, 
or any court constituted in that behalf by the District Council, shall exercise 
the powers of a court of appeal in respect of all suits and cases triable by a 
village council or court constituted under sub-paragraph (1) of this 
paragraph within such region or area, as the case may be, other than those to 
which the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 of this Schedule 
apply, and no other court except the High Court and the Supreme Court 
shall have jurisdiction over such suits or cases.
(3) The High Court 2*** shall have and exercise such jurisdiction 
over the suits and cases to which the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this 
paragraph apply as the Governor may from time to time by order specify.
______________________________________________
1.  Paragraph 4 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2, (w.e.f. 7-9-2003) 
so as to insert the following sub-paragraph after  sub-paragraph (5), namely:—
“(6) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council 
constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.” .
2. The words "of Assam" omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 
(81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).   

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
289
(4) A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may 
with the previous approval of the Governor make rules regulating —
(a) the constitution of village councils and courts and the 
powers to be exercised by them under this paragraph;
(b) the procedure to be followed by village councils or courts in 
the trial of suits and cases under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph;
(c) the procedure to be followed by the Regional or District 
Council or any court constituted by such Council in appeals and other 
proceedings under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph;
(d) the enforcement of decisions and orders of such councils 
and courts; 
(e) all other ancillary matters for the carrying out of the 
provisions of sub-paragraphs (1) and (2) of this paragraph.
1[(5) On and from such date as the President may, 2[after consulting the 
Government of the State concerned], by notification appoint in this behalf, this 
paragraph shall have effect in relation to such autonomous district or region as 
may be specified in the notification, as if—
(i) in sub-paragraph (1), for the words “between the parties all of 
whom belong to Scheduled Tribes within such areas, other than suits 
and cases to which the provisions of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 5 
of this Schedule apply,”, the words “not being suits and cases of the 
nature referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph (5) of this 
Schedule, which the Governor may specify in this behalf,” had been 
substituted;
(ii) sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) had been omitted;
(iii) in sub-paragraph (4)—
(a) for the words “A Regional Council or District 
Council, as the case may be, may with the previous approval of 
the Governor make rules regulating”, the words “the Governor 
may make rules regulating” had been substituted; and
(b) for clause (a), the following clause had been 
substituted, namely:—
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).    
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) 
and Eighth Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
290
“(a) the constitution of village councils and courts, 
the powers to be exercised by them under this paragraph 
and the courts to which appeals from the decisions of 
village councils and courts shall lie;”; 
(c) for clause (c), the following clause had been 
substituted, namely:—
“(c) the transfer of appeals and other proceedings 
pending before the Regional or District Council or any 
court constituted by such Council immediately before the 
date appointed by the President under sub-paragraph 
(5);”; and 
(d) in clause (e), for the words, brackets and figures   
“sub-paragraphs (1) and (2)”, the word, brackets and figure 
“sub-paragraph (1)” had been substituted.] 
5. Conferment of powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981, on the Regional and 
District Councils and on certain courts and officers for the trial of 
certain suits, cases and offences.—(1) The Governor may, for the trial of 
suits or cases arising out of any law in force in any autonomous district or 
region being a law specified in that behalf by the Governor, or for the trial 
of offences punishable with death, transportation for life, or imprisonment 
for a term of not less than five years under the Indian Penal Code or under 
any other law for the time being applicable to such district or region, confer 
on the District Council or the Regional Council having authority over such 
district or region or on courts constituted by such District Council or on any 
officer appointed in that behalf by the Governor, such powers under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, or, as the case may be, the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 18981, as he deems appropriate, and thereupon the said Council, 
court or officer shall try the suits, cases or offences in exercise of the 
powers so conferred.
(2) The Governor may withdraw or modify any of the powers 
conferred on a District Council, Regional Council, court or officer under 
sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph.
(3) Save as expressly provided in this paragraph, the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18981, shall not 
apply to the trial of any suits, cases or offences in an autonomous district or 
in any autonomous region to which the provisions of this paragraph apply.
______________________________________________
1. See the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
291
1[(4) On and from the date appointed by the President under 
sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 4 in relation to any autonomous district or 
autonomous region, nothing contained in this paragraph shall, in its 
application to that district or region, be deemed to authorise the Governor to 
confer on the District Council or Regional  Council or on courts constituted 
by the District Council any of the powers referred to in sub-paragraph (1) of 
this paragraph.] 
2[6. Powers of the District Council to establish primary schools, 
etc.— (1) The District Council for an autonomous district may establish, 
construct, or manage primary schools, dispensaries, markets, 3[cattle 
pounds], ferries, fisheries, roads, road transport and waterways in the district 
and may, with the previous approval of the Governor, make regulations for 
the regulation and control thereof and, in particular, may prescribe the 
language and the manner in which primary education shall be imparted in 
the primary schools in the district.
(2) The Governor may, with the consent of any District Council, 
entrust either conditionally or unconditionally to that Council or to its 
officers functions in relation to agriculture, animal husbandry, community 
projects, co-operative societies, social welfare, village planning or any other 
matter to which the executive power of the State 4***  extends.
7. District and Regional Funds.—(1) There shall be constituted for 
each autonomous district, a District Fund and for each autonomous region, a 
Regional Fund to which shall be credited all moneys received respectively 
by the District Council for that district and the Regional Council for that 
region in the course of the administration of such district or region, as the 
case may be, in accordance with the provisions of this Constitution.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
2. Subs. by  s. 74 and Fourth Sch., ibid. for "paragraph 6" (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
3. Subs. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1974 (56 of 1974), s. 4, for "cattle 
ponds" (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).
4. The words "of Assam or Meghalaya, as the case may be," omitted by the North-
Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch. 
(w.e.f. 21-1-1972).    

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
292
1[(2) The Governor may make rules for the management of the 
District Fund, or, as the case may be, the Regional Fund and for the 
procedure to be followed in respect of payment of money into the said Fund, 
the withdrawal of moneys therefrom, the custody of moneys therein and any 
other matter connected with or ancillary to the matters  aforesaid.
(3) The accounts of the District Council or, as the case may be, the 
Regional Council shall be kept in such form as the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India may, with the approval of the President, prescribe.
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall cause the accounts of 
the District and Regional Councils to be audited in such manner as he may 
think fit, and the reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General relating to 
such accounts shall be submitted to the Governor who shall cause them to 
be laid before the Council.] 
8. Powers to assess and collect land revenue and to impose 
taxes.—(1) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of all 
lands within such region and the District Council for an autonomous district 
in respect of all lands within the district except those which are in the areas 
under the authority of Regional Councils, if any, within the district, shall 
have the power to assess and collect revenue in respect of such lands in 
accordance with the principles for the time being followed 2[by the 
Government of the State in assessing lands for the purpose of land revenue 
in the State generally.]
(2) The Regional Council for an autonomous region in respect of areas 
within such region and the District Council for an autonomous district in 
respect of all areas in the district except those which are under the authority of 
Regional Councils, if any, within the district, shall have power to levy and 
collect taxes on lands and buildings, and tolls on persons resident within such 
areas.
(3) The District Council for an autonomous district shall have the power to 
levy  and  collect  all or any of the following taxes within such district, that is to  
say —
(a) taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments;
(b) taxes on animals, vehicles and boats;
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch., for sub-paragraph (2) (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
2. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) 
and Eighth Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).     

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
293
(c) taxes on the entry of goods into a market for sale therein,
and tolls on passengers and goods carried in ferries; 1***
(d) taxes for the maintenance of schools, dispensaries or roads;
2[and] 
3[(e)  taxes on entertainment and amusements.]
(4) A Regional Council or District Council, as the case may be, may
make regulations to provide for the levy and collection of any of the taxes 
specified in sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of this paragraph 4[and every such 
regulation shall be submitted forthwith to the Governor and, until assented 
to by him, shall have no effect].
59. Licences or leases for the purpose of prospecting for, or
extraction of, minerals.—(1) Such share of the royalties accruing each year 
from licences or leases for the purpose of prospecting for, or the extraction of, 
minerals granted by 6[the Government of the State] in respect of any area 
within an autonomous district as may be agreed upon between 6[the 
Government of the State] and the District Council of such district shall be 
made over to that District Council.
(2) If any dispute arises as to the share of such royalties to be made
over to a District Council, it shall be referred to the Governor for 
determination and the amount determined by the Governor in his discretion 
shall be deemed to be the amount payable under sub-paragraph (1) of this 
paragraph to the District Council and the decision of the Governor shall be 
final.
______________________________________________
1. The word "and" omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) 
Act, 2016, s. 16(i)  (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Ins. by s. 16(ii), ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Ins. by s. 16(iii), ibid. (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
4 Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
5.
Paragraph 9 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and 
Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 
1988), s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-12-1988), so as to insert the following sub-paragraph after
sub-paragraph (2), namely:—
“(3) The Governor may, by order, direct that the share of royalties to be made 
over to a District Council under this paragraph shall be made over to that Council 
within a period of one year from the date of any agreement under sub-paragraph (1) 
or, as the case may be, of  any determination under sub-paragraph (2).”.
6. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for "the Government of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
294
110. Power of District Council to make regulations for the control 
of money-lending  and  trading  by non-tribals.—(1)  The  District  
Council   of  an   autonomous  district  may   make regulations  for  the 
regulation and control of money-lending or trading within the district by 
persons other than Scheduled Tribes resident in the district.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may— 
(a) prescribe that no one except the holder of a licence issued 
in that behalf shall   carry on the business of money-lending;
(b) prescribe the maximum rate of interest which may be 
charged or be recovered by a money-lender;
(c) provide for the maintenance of accounts by money-lenders 
and for the inspection of such accounts by officers appointed in that 
behalf by the District Council;
(d) prescribe that no person who is not a member of the 
Scheduled Tribes resident in the district shall carry on wholesale or 
retail business in any commodity except under a licence issued in that 
behalf by the District Council:
______________________________________________
1.  Paragraph 10 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and 
Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of  
1988) (w.e.f. 16-12-1988) s.2, as under—
(a) in the heading, the words “by non-tribals” shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-paragraph (1), the words “other than Scheduled Tribes” shall be 
omitted;
(c) in sub-paragraph (2), for clause (d), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:—
"(d)  prescribe that no person resident in the district shall carry on any 
trade, whether wholesale or retail, except under a licence issued in that behalf 
by the District Council:”.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
295
Provided that no regulations may be made under this paragraph 
unless they are passed by a majority of not less than three-fourths of the 
total membership of the District Council:
Provided further that it shall not be competent under any such 
regulations to refuse the grant of a licence to a money-lender or a trader who 
has been carrying on business within the district since before the time of the 
making of such regulations.
(3) All regulations made under this paragraph shall be submitted 
forthwith to the Governor and, until assented to by him, shall have no 
effect.
                              *                                  *                                   *
11. Publication of laws, rules and regulations made under the 
Schedule.—All laws, rules and regulations made under this Schedule by a 
District Council or a Regional Council shall be published forthwith in the 
Official Gazette of the State and shall on such publication have the force of 
law. 
-
12.
1[Application of Acts of Parliament and of the 
Legislature of the State of Assam to autonomous districts and 
autonomous regions in the State of Assam].— (1) Notwithstanding 
anything in this Constitution,—
______________________________________________
Paragraph 10 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule 
to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-2003), so as to insert 
the following sub-paragraph after sub-paragraph (3), namely:—
"(4) Nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial Council 
constituted under the proviso to sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 2 of this Schedule.".
Paragraph 12 has been amended to its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth Schedule 
to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-9-1995) as under,—
‘in paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (1), for the words and figure “matters specified in 
paragraph 3 of this Schedule”, the words, figures and letter “matters specified in paragraph 3 
or paragraph 3A of this Schedule” shall be substituted.’.
Paragraph 12 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-2003), as 
under,—
‘in paragraph 12, in sub-paragraph (1), in clause (a), for the words, figures and letter 
“matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A of this Schedule”, the words, figures and 
letters “matters specified in paragraph 3 or paragraph 3A or paragraph 3B of this Schedule” 
shall be substituted.’. 
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth 
Sch., for the heading (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
296
 (a) no Act of the 1[Legislature of the State of Assam] in respect 
of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as 
matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council 
may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of Assam 
prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic 
liquor shall apply to any autonomous district or autonomous region 2[in 
that State] unless in either case the District Council for such district or 
having jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs, 
and the District Council in giving such direction with respect to any 
Act may direct that the Act shall in its application to such district or 
region or any part thereof have effect subject to such exceptions or 
modifications as it thinks fit;
(b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any 
Act of Parliament or of the 1[Legislature of the State of Assam] to 
which the provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply 
shall not apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region 
2[in that State], or shall apply to such district or region or any part 
thereof subject to such exceptions or modifications as he may specify 
in the notification.
(2) Any direction given under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph 
may be given so as to have retrospective effect.
3[12A. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of 
the State of Meghalaya to autonomous districts and autonomous 
regions in the State of Meghalaya.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution,—
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) 
and Eighth Sch., for "Legislature of the State" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2. Ins. by  s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch.,  ibid. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
3. Subs. by  s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch., ibid., for paragraph 12A (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
297
(a) if any provision of a law made by a District or Regional 
Council in the State of Meghalaya with respect to any matter 
specified in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 3 of this Schedule or if 
any provision of any regulation made by a District Council or a 
Regional Council in that State under paragraph 8 or paragraph 10 of 
this Schedule, is repugnant to any provision of a law made by the 
Legislature of the State of Meghalaya with respect to that matter, 
then, the law or regulation made by the District Council or, as the 
case may be,  the Regional Council whether made before or after the 
law made by the Legislature of the State of Meghalaya, shall, to the 
extent of repugnancy, be void and the law made by the Legislature of 
the State of Meghalaya shall prevail;
(b) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, 
by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district 
or an autonomous region in the State of Meghalaya, or shall apply to 
such district or region or any part thereof subject to such exceptions 
or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such 
direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect.]
1[12AA. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature 
of the State of Tripura to  the autonomous districts and autonomous 
regions in the State of Tripura.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution,—
(a) no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura in respect of 
any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as matters 
with respect to which a District Council or a Regional Council may 
make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura 
prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any non-distilled alcoholic 
liquor shall apply to the autonomous district or an autonomous region 
in that State unless, in either case, the District Council for that district 
or having jurisdiction over such region by public notification so directs, 
and the District Council in giving such direction with respect to any Act 
may direct that the Act shall, in its application to that district or such 
region or any part thereof have effect subject to such exceptions or 
modifications as it thinks fit;
______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 12AA ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 
(w.e.f. 1-4-1985) and subsequently subs. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution 
(Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988),  s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-12-1988).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
298
(b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any 
Act of the Legislature of the State of Tripura to which the provisions 
of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply, shall not apply to the 
autonomous district or an autonomous region in that State, or shall 
apply to that district or such region, or any part thereof, subject to 
such exceptions or modifications, as he may specify in the 
notification;
(c) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, 
by notification, direct that it shall not apply to the autonomous district 
or an autonomous region in the State of Tripura, or shall apply to 
such district or region or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions 
or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such 
direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect. 
12B. Application of Acts of Parliament and of the Legislature of 
the State of Mizoram to autonomous districts and autonomous regions 
in 
the 
State 
of 
Mizoram.—Notwithstanding 
anything 
in 
this 
Constitution,—
(a) no Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram in respect 
of any of the matters specified in paragraph 3 of this Schedule as 
matters with respect to which a District Council or a Regional 
Council may make laws, and no Act of the Legislature of the State of 
Mizoram prohibiting or restricting the consumption of any            
non-distilled alcoholic liquor shall apply to any autonomous district 
or autonomous region in that State unless, in either case, the District 
Council for such district or having jurisdiction over such region, by 
public notification, so directs, and the District Council, in giving such 
direction with respect to any Act, may direct that the Act shall, in its 
application to such district or region or any part thereof, have effect 
subject to such exceptions or modifications as it thinks fit;
(b) the Governor may, by public notification, direct that any 
Act of the Legislature of the State of Mizoram to which the 
provisions of clause (a) of this sub-paragraph do not apply, shall not 
apply to an autonomous district or an autonomous region in that 
State, or shall apply to such district or region, or any part thereof, 
subject to such exceptions or modifications, as he may specify in the 
notification;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
299
(c) the President may, with respect to any Act of Parliament, 
by notification, direct that it shall not apply to an autonomous district 
or an autonomous region in the State of Mizoram, or shall apply to 
such district or region or any part thereof, subject to such exceptions 
or modifications as he may specify in the notification and any such 
direction may be given so as to have retrospective effect.]] 
13. Estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to autonomous 
districts to be shown separately in the annual financial statement.—The 
estimated receipts and expenditure pertaining to an autonomous district 
which are to be credited to, or is to be made from, the Consolidated Fund of 
the State 1*** shall be first placed before the District Council for discussion 
and then after such discussion be shown separately in the annual financial 
statement of the State to be laid before the Legislature of the State under 
article 202. 
214. Appointment of Commission to inquire into and report on 
the administration of autonomous districts and autonomous regions.—
(1) The Governor may at any time appoint a Commission to examine and 
report on any matter specified by him relating to the administration of the 
autonomous districts and autonomous regions in the State, including matters 
specified in clauses (c), (d), (e) and (f) of sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 1 
of this Schedule, or may appoint a Commission to inquire into and report 
from time to time on the administration of autonomous districts and 
autonomous regions in the State generally and in particular on—
(a) the provision of educational and medical facilities and 
communications in such districts and regions;
(b) the need for any new or special legislation in respect of 
such districts and regions; and
(c) the administration of the laws, rules and regulations made 
by the District and Regional Councils;
and define the procedure to be followed by such Commission.
______________________________________________
1. The words "of Assam" omitted by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) 
Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).    
2.  Paragraph 14 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution  (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2
(w.e.f. 12-9-1995) as under:—
‘in paragraph 14, in sub-paragraph (2), the words “with the recommendations 
of the Governor with respect thereto” shall be omitted.’.  

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
300
(2) The report of every such Commission with the recommendations 
of the Governor with respect thereto shall be laid before the Legislature of 
the State by the Minister concerned together with an explanatory 
memorandum regarding the action proposed to be taken thereon by 1[the 
Government of the State.]
(3) In allocating the business of the Government of the State among 
his Ministers the Governor may place one of his Ministers specially in 
charge of the welfare of the autonomous districts and autonomous regions in 
the State.
215. Annulment or suspension of acts and resolutions of District 
and Regional Councils.—(1) If at any time the Governor is satisfied that an 
act or resolution of a District or a Regional Council is likely to endanger the 
safety of India 3[or is likely to be prejudicial to public order], he may annul 
or suspend such act or resolution and take such steps as he may consider 
necessary (including the suspension of the Council and the assumption to 
himself of all or any of the powers vested in or exercisable by the Council) 
to prevent the commission or continuance of such act, or the giving of effect 
to such resolution. 
(2) Any order made by the Governor under sub-paragraph (1) of this 
paragraph together with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the 
Legislature of the State as soon as possible and the order shall, unless 
revoked by the Legislature of the State, continue in force for a period of 
twelve months from the date on which it was so made: 
Provided that if and so often as a resolution approving the 
continuance in force of such order is passed by the Legislature of the State, 
the order shall unless cancelled by the Governor continue in force for a 
further period of twelve months from the date on which under this 
paragraph it would otherwise have ceased to operate.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) 
and Eighth Sch., for "the Government of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
2.  Paragraph 15 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and 
Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 
(67 of 1988), s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-12-1988), as under,—
In Paragraph 15, in sub-paragraph (2), —
‘(a) in the opening paragraph, for the words “by the Legislature of the 
State”, the words “by him” shall be substituted;
(b) the proviso shall be omitted.’.
3. Ins. by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and 
Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970).     

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
301
116. Dissolution of a District or a Regional Council.— 2[(1)] The 
Governor may on the recommendation of a Commission appointed under 
paragraph 14 of this Schedule by public notification order the dissolution of 
a District or a Regional Council, and— 
(a) direct that a fresh general election shall be held 
immediately for the reconstitution of the Council; or
(b) subject to the previous approval of the Legislature of the 
State assume the administration of the area under the authority of 
such Council himself or place the administration of such area under 
the Commission appointed under the said paragraph or any other 
body considered suitable by him for a period not exceeding twelve 
months:
Provided that when an order under clause (a) of this paragraph has 
been made, the Governor may take the action referred to in clause (b) of this 
paragraph with regard to the administration of the area in question pending 
the reconstitution of the Council on fresh general election:
Provided further that no action shall be taken under clause (b) of this 
paragraph without giving the District or the Regional Council, as the case 
may be, an opportunity of placing its views before the Legislature of the 
State.
______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 16 has been amended in its application to the States of Tripura and 
Mizoram by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 
(67 of 1988)  s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-12-1988), as under,—
‘(a) in sub-paragraph (1), the words “subject to the previous approval of the 
Legislature of the State” occurring in clause (b), and the second proviso shall be 
omitted;
(b) for sub-paragraph (3), the following sub-paragraph shall be substituted, 
namely:—
“(3) Every order made under sub-paragraph (1) or sub-paragraph (2) of 
this paragraph, along with the reasons therefor shall be laid before the 
Legislature of the State.”.’.
2. Paragraph 16 renumbered as sub-paragraph (1) thereof by the Assam 
Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 and Fourth Sch. 
(w.e.f. 2-4-1970).     

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
302
1[(2) If at any time the Governor is satisfied that a situation has arisen in 
which the administration of an autonomous district or region cannot be carried 
on in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule, he may, by public 
notification, assume to himself all or any of the functions or powers vested in or 
exercisable by the District Council or, as the case may be, the Regional Council 
and declare that such functions or powers shall be exercisable by such person or 
authority as he may specify in this behalf, for a period not exceeding six months:
Provided that the Governor may by a further order or orders extend the  
operation of the initial order by a period not exceeding six months on each 
occasion.
(3) Every order made under sub-paragraph (2) of this paragraph with 
the reasons therefor shall be laid before the Legislature of the State and shall 
cease to operate at the expiration of thirty days from the date on which the 
State Legislature first sits after the issue of the order, unless, before the 
expiry of that period it has been approved by that State Legislature.] 
217. Exclusion of areas from autonomous districts in forming 
constituencies in such districts.—For the purposes of elections to 3[the 
Legislative Assembly of Assam or Meghalaya] 4[or Tripura] 5[or Mizoram], 
the Governor may by order declare that any area within an autonomous 
district 6[in the State of Assam or Meghalaya 4[or Tripura] 5[or Mizoram], 
as the case may be,] shall not form part of any constituency to fill a seat or 
seats in the Assembly reserved for any such district but shall form part of a 
constituency to fill a seat or seats in the Assembly not so reserved to be 
specified in the order.
7[18.*
*
*
*                  *]
______________________________________________
1.  Added by the Assam Reorganisation (Meghalaya) Act, 1969 (55 of 1969), s. 74 
and Fourth Sch. (w.e.f. 2-4-1970). 
2. Paragraph 17 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2
(w.e.f. 7-9-2003) so as to insert the following proviso, namely:—
“Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall apply to the Bodoland Territorial 
Areas District.”. 
3.  Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) 
and Eighth Sch., for "the Legislative Assembly of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
5. Ins. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39 (w.e.f. 20-2-1987).
6. Ins. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) 
and Eighth Sch., for "the Legislative Assembly of Assam" (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).
7. Paragraph 18 omitted by s. 71(i) and Eighth Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 21-1-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
303
119. Transitional provisions.—(1) As soon as possible after the
commencement of this Constitution the Governor shall take steps for the 
constitution of a District Council for each autonomous district in the State 
under this Schedule and, until a District Council is so constituted for an 
autonomous district, the administration of such district shall be vested in the 
Governor and the following provisions shall apply to the administration of 
the areas within such district instead of the foregoing provisions of this 
Schedule, namely:— 
(a) no Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State shall
apply to any such area unless the Governor by public notification so 
directs; and the Governor in giving such a direction with respect to 
any Act may direct that the Act shall, in its application to the area or 
to any specified part thereof, have effect subject to such exceptions or 
modifications as he thinks fit; 
(b) the Governor may make regulations for the peace and good
government of any such area and any regulations so made may repeal 
or amend any Act of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State or 
any existing law which is for the time being applicable to such area. 
(2) Any direction given by the Governor under clause (a) of
sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph may be given so as to have retrospective 
effect. 
______________________________________________ 
1. Paragraph 19 has been amended in its application to the State of Assam by the
Sixth Sch. to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 (44 of 2003), s. 2
(w.e.f. 7-9-2003),  so as to insert the following sub-paragraph after  sub-paragraph 
(3), namely :—
‘(4) As soon as possible after the commencement of this Act and Interim
Executive Council for Bodoland Territorial Areas District in Assam shall be
formed by the Governor from amongst leaders of the Bodo movement, including 
the signatories to the Memorandum of Settlement, and shall provide adequate 
representation to the non-tribal communities in that area: 
Provided that Interim Council shall be for a period of six months during
which endeavour to hold the election to the Council shall be made. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph, the expression 
“Memorandum of Settlement” means the Memorandum signed on the 10th day of 
February, 2003 between Government of India, Government of Assam and Bodo
Liberation Tigers.’.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
304
(3) All regulations made under clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of this
paragraph  shall be submitted forthwith to the President and, until assented 
to by him, shall have no effect.
1[20. Tribal areas.—(1) The areas specified in Parts I, II 2[, IIA] and 
III of the table below shall respectively be the tribal areas within the State of 
Assam, the State of Meghalaya 2[, the State of Tripura] and the 3[State] of 
Mizoram. 
(2) 4[Any reference in Part I, Part II or Part III of the table below] to
any district shall be construed as a reference to the territories comprised 
within the autonomous district of that name existing immediately before the 
day appointed under clause (b) of section 2 of the North-Eastern Areas 
(Reorganisation)  Act, 1971: 
Provided that for the purposes of clauses (e) and (f) of sub-paragraph 
(1) of paragraph 3, paragraph 4, paragraph 5, paragraph 6, sub-paragraph
(2), clauses (a), (b) and (d) of sub-paragraph (3) and sub-paragraph (4) of
paragraph 8 and clause (d) of sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 10 of this
Schedule, no part of the area comprised within the municipality of Shillong
shall be deemed to be within the 5[Khasi Hills District].
 2[(3) The reference in Part IIA in the table below to the "Tripura 
Tribal Areas District" shall be construed as a reference to the territory 
comprising the tribal areas specified in the First Schedule to the Tripura 
Tribal Areas Autonomous District Council Act, 1979.] 
______________________________________________ 
1. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i)
and Eighth Sch., for paragraphs 20 and 20A (w.e.f. 21-1-1972) and paragraph 20A 
further substituted by the Government of Union Territory (Amendment) Act, 1971
(83 of 1971) s. 13 (w.e.f. 29-4-1972). 
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-1985). 
3. Subs. by the State of Mizoram Act, 1986 (34 of 1986), s. 39, for "Union territory" 
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987). 
4. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4, for "any
reference in the table below" (w.e.f. 1-4-1985). 
5. Subs. by the Government of Meghalaya Notification No. DCA 31/72/11, dated the 
14th June, 1973, Gazette of Meghalaya, Pt. VA, dated 23-6-1973, p. 200. 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
305
TABLE 
PART  I
1. The North Cachar Hills District. 
2.  1[The Karbi Anglong District.] 
2[3.The Bodoland Territorial Areas District.]
 
PART II
3[1.  Khasi Hills District.
2.  Jaintia Hills District.] 
3.  The Garo Hills District.
4[PART IIA]
    Tripura Tribal Areas District] 
Part III
5*   
*          *
6[1. The Chakma District.
7[2. The Mara District. 
3.  The Lai District.]] 
 
8[20A. 
Dissolution 
of 
the 
Mizo 
District 
Council.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything in this Schedule, the District Council of the Mizo 
District existing immediately before the prescribed date (hereinafter referred 
to as the Mizo District Council) shall stand dissolved and cease to exist.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Government of Assam Notification No. TAD/R/115/74/47, 
dated 14-10-1976 for "The Mikir Hills District".
2. Ins. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2003 
(44 of 2003), s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-9-2003).
3. Subs. by the Government of Meghalaya Notification No. DCA 31/72/11, 
dated the 14th June, 1973, Gazette of Meghalaya, Pt. VA, dated 23-6-1973, p. 200. 
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1984, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-4-1985).
5. The words "The Mizo District." omitted by the Government of Union Territories 
(Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 1971), s. 13 (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).
6. Ins. by the Mizoram District Councils (Miscellaneous Provisions) Order, 1972,  
published in the Mizoram Gazette, 1972, dated the 5th May, 1972, Vol. I, Pt. II, 
p.17 (w.e.f. 29-4-1972).
7. Subs. by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988              
(67 of 1988), s. 2, for serial numbers 2 and 3 and the entries relating thereto   
(w.e.f. 16-12-1988).
8. Subs. by the North-Eastern Areas (Recognisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971), s. 71(i) and 
Eight Sch. for paragraph 20 (w.e.f. 21-1-1972) and further subs. by the Government 
of Union Territory (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 1971), s. 13 for paragraph 20A 
(w.e.f. 16-2-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
306
(2) The Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram may, by one or
more orders, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities
of the Mizo District Council (including the rights and liabilities under
any contract made by it) to the Union or to any other authority;
(b) the substitution of the Union or any other authority for the Mizo
District Council, or the addition of the Union or any other authority,
as a party to any legal proceedings to which the Mizo District
Council is a party;
(c) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the Mizo
District Council to or by the Union or any other authority, the terms
and conditions of service applicable to such employees after such 
transfer or re-employment;
(d) the continuance of any laws, made by the Mizo District Council
and in force immediately before its dissolution, subject to such 
adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or
amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf, until such
laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or
other competent authority;
(e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters as the
Administrator considers necessary.
Explanation.—In this paragraph and in paragraph 20B of this Schedule, the 
expression "prescribed date" means the date on which the Legislative 
Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram is duly constituted under and in 
accordance with the provisions of the Government of Union Territories Act, 
1963. (20 of 1963)] 
1[20B. Autonomous regions in the Union territory of Mizoram to 
be autonomous
districts
and
transitory
provisions
consequent 
thereto.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in this Schedule,— 
(a) every autonomous region existing immediately before the
prescribed date in the Union territory of Mizoram shall, on and from
that date, be an autonomous district in that Union territory (hereafter
referred to as the corresponding new district) and the Administrator
thereof may, by one or more orders, direct that such consequential
amendments as are necessary to give effect to the provisions of this
clause shall be made in paragraph 20 of this Schedule (including Part
III of the table appended to that paragraph) and thereupon the said
paragraph and the said Part III shall be deemed to have been amended 
accordingly;
___________________________________________________________ 
1. 
Sub. by the Government of Union Territory (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 
1971), s. 13 for paragraph 20A (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule)
307
(b) every Regional Council of an autonomous region in the
Union territory of Mizoram existing immediately before the 
prescribed date (hereafter referred to as the existing Regional 
Council) shall, on and from that date and until a District Council is 
duly constituted for the corresponding new district, be deemed to be 
the District Council of that district (hereafter referred to as the 
corresponding new District Council). 
(2) Every member whether elected or nominated of an existing Regional 
Council shall be deemed to have been elected or, as the case may be, nominated 
to the corresponding new District Council and shall hold office until a District 
Council is duly constituted for the corresponding new district under this 
Schedule. 
(3) Until rules are made under sub-paragraph (7) of paragraph 2 and
sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 4 of this Schedule by the corresponding new 
District Council, the rules made under the said provisions by the existing 
Regional Council and in force immediately before the prescribed date shall 
have effect in relation to the corresponding new District Council subject to 
such adaptations and modifications as may be made therein by the 
Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram.
(4) The Administrator of the Union territory of  Mizoram  may, by
one or more orders, provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:—
(a) the transfer in whole or in part of the assets, rights and 
liabilities of the existing Regional Council (including the rights and 
liabilities under any contract made by it) to the corresponding new 
District Council;
(b) the substitution of the corresponding new District Council
for the existing Regional Council as a party to the legal proceedings 
to which the existing Regional Council is a party;
(c) the transfer or re-employment of any employees of the
existing Regional Council to or by the corresponding new District 
Council, the terms and conditions of service applicable to such 
employees after such transfer or re-employment;

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
308
(d) the continuance of any laws made by the existing Regional 
Council and in force immediately before the prescribed date, subject 
to such adaptations and modifications, whether by way of repeal or 
amendment, as the Administrator may make in this behalf until such 
laws are altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or 
other competent authority;
(e) such incidental, consequential and supplementary matters 
as the Administrator considers necessary.]
1[20BA. Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the 
discharge of his functions.—The Governor in the discharge of his 
functions under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs 
(1), (6), sub-paragraph (6A) excluding the first proviso and sub-paragraph 
(7) of paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3, sub-paragraph (4) of 
paragraph 4, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, sub-paragraph 
(2) of paragraph 7, sub-paragraph (4) of paragraph 8, sub-paragraph (3) of 
paragraph 9, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 10, sub-paragraph (1) of 
paragraph 14, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 and sub-paragraphs (1) and 
(2) of paragraph 16 of this Schedule, shall, after consulting the Council of 
Ministers and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council or the Karbi 
Anglong Autonomous Council, as the case may be, take such action as he 
considers necessary in his  discretion.]
2[20BB. Exercise of discretionary powers by the Governor in the 
discharge of his functions.—The Governor, in the discharge of his 
functions under sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) of paragraph 1, sub-paragraphs 
(1) and (7) of paragraph 2, sub-paragraph (3) of paragraph 3, sub-paragraph 
(4) of paragraph 4, paragraph 5, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6, sub-
paragraph (2) of paragraph 7, sub-paragraph (3) of  paragraph 9, sub-
paragraph (1) of paragraph 14, sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 15 and sub-
paragraphs (1)  and (2) of paragraph 16 of this Schedule, shall, after 
consulting the Council of Ministers, and if he thinks it necessary, the 
District Council or the Regional Council concerned, take such action as he 
considers necessary in his discretion.]
______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 20BA has been inserted in its application to the State of Assam by the Sixth 
Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1995 (42 of 1995), s. 2 (w.e.f. 12-9-1995).
2.   Paragraph 20BB has been inserted in its application to the States of Tripura and Mizoram, by 
the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1988 (67 of 1988), s. 2
(w.e.f. 16-12-1988).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Sixth Schedule) 
309
1[20C. Interpretation.—Subject to any provision made in this 
behalf, the provisions of this Schedule shall, in their application to the 
Union territory of Mizoram, have effect—
(1) as if references to the Governor and Government of the 
State were references to the Administrator of the Union territory 
appointed under article 239, references to State (except in the 
expression "Government of the State") were references to the Union 
territory of Mizoram and references to the State Legislature were 
references to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of 
Mizoram; 
(2) as if—
(a) in sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 4, the provision 
for consultation with the Government of the State concerned 
had been omitted;
(b) in sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6, for the words 
"to which the executive power of the State extends", the words 
"with respect to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union 
territory of Mizoram has power to make laws" had been 
substituted;
(c) in paragraph 13, the words and figures "under article 
202" had been omitted.]
21. Amendment of the Schedule.—(1) Parliament may from time to 
time by law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the 
provisions of this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any 
reference to this Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a 
reference to such Schedule as so amended.
(2) No such law as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this 
paragraph shall be deemed to be an amendment of this Constitution for the 
purposes of article 368.
___________________________________________________________
1.
Sub. by the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1971 (83 of 
1971), s. 13 for paragraph 20A (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).

 
310
SEVENTH SCHEDULE
(Article 246) 
List I—Union List
1. Defence of India and every part thereof including preparation for 
defence and all such acts as may be conducive in times of war to its prosecution 
and after its termination to effective demobilisation.
2. Naval, military and air forces; any other armed forces of the Union.
1[2A. Deployment of any armed force of the Union or any other force 
subject to the control of the Union or any contingent or unit thereof in any State 
in aid of the civil power; powers, jurisdiction, privileges and liabilities of the 
members of such forces while on such deployment.] 
3. Delimitation of cantonment areas, local self-government in such areas, 
the constitution and powers within such areas of cantonment authorities and the 
regulation of house accommodation (including the control of rents) in such 
areas.
4. Naval, military and air force works.
5. Arms, firearms, ammunition and explosives.
6. Atomic energy and mineral resources necessary for its production.
7. Industries declared by Parliament by law to be necessary for the 
purpose of defence or for the prosecution of war.
8. Central Bureau of Intelligence and Investigation.
9. Preventive detention for reasons connected with Defence, Foreign 
Affairs, or the security of India; persons subjected to such detention.
10. Foreign affairs; all matters which bring the Union into relation with 
any foreign country.
11. Diplomatic, consular and trade representation. 
12. United Nations Organisation.
13. Participation in international conferences, associations and other 
bodies and implementing of decisions made thereat.
14. Entering into treaties and agreements with foreign countries and 
implementing of treaties, agreements and conventions with foreign countries.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
311
15. War and peace.
16. Foreign jurisdiction.
17. Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens.
18. Extradition.
19. Admission into, and emigration and expulsion from, India; passports 
and visas. 
20. Pilgrimages to places outside India.
21. Piracies and crimes committed on the high seas or in the air; offences 
against the law of nations committed on land or the high seas or in the air. 
22. Railways.
23. Highways declared by or under law made by Parliament to be national 
highways.
24. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways, declared by Parliament 
by law to be national waterways, as regards mechanically propelled vessels; the 
rule of the road on such waterways.
25. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation 
on tidal waters; provision of education and training for the mercantile marine 
and regulation of such education and training provided by States and other 
agencies.
26. Lighthouses, including lightships, beacons and other provision for the 
safety of shipping and aircraft.
27. Ports declared by or under law made by Parliament or existing law to 
be major ports, including their delimitation, and the constitution and powers of 
port authorities therein.
28. Port quarantine, including hospitals connected therewith; seamen's and 
marine hospitals.
29. Airways; aircraft and air navigation; provision of aerodromes; 
regulation and organisation of air traffic and of aerodromes; provision for 
aeronautical education and training and regulation of such education and 
training provided by States and other agencies.
30. Carriage of passengers and goods by railway, sea or air, or by national 
waterways in mechanically propelled vessels.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
312
31. Posts and telegraphs; telephones, wireless, broadcasting and other like 
forms of communication. 
32. Property of the Union and the revenue therefrom, but as regards 
property situated in a State 1*** subject to legislation by the State, save in so 
far as Parliament by law otherwise provides.
2[33* 
*   
*
*                        *]
34. Courts of wards for the estates of Rulers of Indian States.
35. Public debt of the Union.
36. Currency, coinage and legal tender;  foreign exchange.
37. Foreign loans.
38. Reserve Bank of India.
39. Post Office Savings Bank.
40. Lotteries organised by the Government of India or the Government of 
a State. 
41. Trade and commerce with foreign countries; import and export across 
customs frontiers; definition of customs frontiers. 
42. Inter-State trade and commerce.
43. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading corporations, 
including banking, insurance and financial corporations, but not including 
co-operative societies.
44. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, whether 
trading or not, with objects not confined to one State, but not including 
universities. 
45. Banking.
46. Bills of exchange, cheques, promissory notes and other like 
instruments.
47. Insurance.
48. Stock exchanges and futures markets.
49. Patents, inventions and designs; copyright; trade-marks and merchandise 
marks.
______________________________________________
1. The words and letters "specified in Part A or Part B of the First Schedule" omitted by 
the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
2.  Entry 33 omitted by s. 26, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-1956). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
313
50. Establishment of standards of weight and measure.
51. Establishment of standards of quality for goods to be exported out of 
India or transported from one State to another. 
52. Industries, the control of which by the Union is declared by Parliament 
by law to be expedient in the public interest.
53. Regulation and development of oilfields and mineral oil resources; 
petroleum and petroleum products; other liquids and substances declared by 
Parliament by law to be dangerously inflammable. 
54. Regulation of mines and mineral development to the extent to which 
such regulation and development under the control of the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
55. Regulation of labour and safety in mines and oilfields.
56. Regulation and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys to 
the extent to which such regulation and development under the control of the 
Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the public interest.
57. Fishing and fisheries beyond territorial waters.
58. Manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by Union agencies; 
regulation and control of manufacture, supply and distribution of salt by other 
agencies.
59. Cultivation, manufacture, and sale for export, of opium.
60. Sanctioning of cinematograph films for exhibition.
61. Industrial disputes concerning Union employees.
62. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as 
the National Library, the Indian Museum, the Imperial War Museum, the 
Victoria Memorial and the Indian War Memorial, and any other like institution 
financed by the Government of India wholly or in  part and declared by 
Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance.
63. The institutions known at the commencement of this Constitution as the 
Benares Hindu University, the Aligarh Muslim University and the 1[Delhi 
University; the University established in pursuance of article 371E;] any other 
institution declared by Parliament by law to be an institution of national importance.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Thirty-second Amendment) Act, 1973, s. 4, for "Delhi 
University and" (w.e.f. 1-7-1974).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
314
64. Institutions for scientific or technical education financed by the 
Government of India wholly or in part and declared by Parliament by law to be 
institutions of national importance.
65. Union agencies and institutions for—
(a) professional, vocational or technical training, including the 
training of police officers; or
(b) the promotion of special studies or research; or
(c) scientific or technical assistance in the investigation or detection 
of crime. 
66. Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher 
education or research and scientific and technical institutions.
67. Ancient and historical monuments and records, and archaeological 
sites and remains, 1[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to be of 
national importance.
68. The Survey of India, the Geological, Botanical, Zoological and 
Anthropological Surveys of India; Meteorological organisations.
69.  Census. 
70. Union Public Service; All-India Services; Union Public Service 
Commission.
71. Union pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the Government of 
India or out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
72. Elections to Parliament, to the Legislatures of States and to the offices 
of President and Vice-President; the Election Commission.
73. Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and 
Deputy Chairman of the Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
of the House of the People.
74. Powers, privileges and immunities of each House of Parliament and of 
the members and the Committees of each House; enforcement of attendance of 
persons for giving evidence or producing documents before committees of 
Parliament or commissions appointed by Parliament.
75. Emoluments, allowances, privileges, and rights in respect of leave
of absence, of the President and Governors; salaries and allowances of
the Ministers for the Union; the salaries, allowances, and rights in respect of 
leave of absence and other conditions of service of the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for "declared by 
Parliament by law" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
315
76. Audit of the accounts of the Union and of the States.
77. Constitution, organisation, jurisdiction and powers of the Supreme 
Court (including contempt of such Court), and the fees taken therein; persons 
entitled to practise before the Supreme Court.
78. Constitution and organisation 1[(including vacations)] of the High 
Courts except provisions as to officers and servants of High Courts; persons 
entitled to practise before the High Courts.
2[79. Extension of the jurisdiction of a High Court to, and exclusion of the 
jurisdiction of a High Court from, any Union territory.]
80. Extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force 
belonging to any State to any area outside that State, but not so as to enable the 
police of one State to exercise powers and jurisdiction in any area outside that 
State without the consent of the Government of the State in which such area is 
situated; extension of the powers and jurisdiction of members of a police force 
belonging to any State to railway areas outside that State. 
81. Inter-State migration; inter-State quarantine.
82. Taxes on income other than agricultural income.
83. Duties of customs including export duties.
3[84. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in 
India, namely:—
(a) petroleum crude;
(b) high speed diesel;
(c) motor spirit (commonly known as petrol);
(d) natural gas;
(e) aviation turbine fuel; and
(f) tobacco and tobacco products.]
85. Corporation tax.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Fifteenth Amendment) Act, 1963, s. 12 (with retrospective 
effect). 
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 29 and Sch. for entry 79
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(a)(i) 
for entry 84 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
316
86. Taxes on the capital value of the assets, exclusive of agricultural land, 
of individuals and companies; taxes on the capital of companies.
87. Estate duty in respect of property other than agricultural land.
88. Duties in respect of succession to property other than agricultural land. 
89. Terminal taxes on goods or passengers, carried by railway, sea or air; 
taxes on railway fares and freights.
90. Taxes other than stamp duties on transactions in stock exchanges and 
futures markets.
91. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange, cheques, 
promissory notes, bills of lading, letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer 
of shares, debentures, proxies and receipts.
1[92. *                  *                  *                  *                  *                  *]
2[92A. Taxes on the sale or purchase of goods other than newspapers, 
where such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-State trade or 
commerce.]
3[92B. Taxes on the consignments of goods (whether the consignment is to 
the person making it or to any other person), where such consignment takes 
place in the course of inter-State trade or  commerce.]
4[92C. *                  *                  *                  *                  *                  *]
93. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.
94. Inquires, surveys and statistics for the purpose of any of the matters in 
this List.
95. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with 
respect to any of the matters in this List; admiralty jurisdiction.
96. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees 
taken in any court.
97. Any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including any tax 
not mentioned in either of those Lists.
______________________________________________
1. Entry 92 omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, 
s. 17(a)(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Ins. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956).
3. Ins.by the Constitution (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982, s. 5 (w.e.f. 2-2-1983).
4. Entry 92C was ins. by the Constitution (Eighty-eighth Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 4 
(which was not enforced) and omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First 
Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(a)(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
317
List II—State List
1. Public order (but not including 1[the use of any naval, military or air 
force or any other armed force of the Union or of any other force subject to the 
control of the Union or of any contingent or unit thereof] in aid of the civil 
power).
2[2. Police (including railway and village police) subject to the provisions 
of entry 2A of List I.]
3. 3*** Officers and servants of the High Court; procedure in rent and 
revenue courts; fees taken in all courts except the Supreme Court.
4. Prisons, reformatories, Borstal institutions and other institutions of a 
like nature, and persons detained therein; arrangements with other States for the 
use of prisons and other institutions. 
5. Local government, that is to say, the constitution and powers of 
municipal corporations, improvement trusts, districts boards, mining settlement 
authorities and other local authorities for the purpose of local self-government 
or village administration.
6. Public health and sanitation; hospitals and dispensaries.
7. Pilgrimages, other than pilgrimages to places outside India.
8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture, 
possession, transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors.
9. Relief of the disabled and unemployable.
10. Burials and burial grounds; cremations and cremation grounds.
4[11*
*
*
*
*]
12. Libraries, museums and other similar institutions controlled or 
financed by the State; ancient and historical monuments and records other than 
those 5[declared by or under law made by Parliament] to be of national 
importance.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57, for certain 
words (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by s. 57, for entry 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
3. Certain words omitted by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
4. Entry 11 omitted  by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
5. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for "declared by 
Parliament by law" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
318
13. Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries, and other 
means of communication not specified in List I; municipal tramways; 
ropeways; inland waterways and traffic thereon subject to the provisions of List 
I and List III with regard to such waterways; vehicles other than mechanically 
propelled vehicles.
14. Agriculture, including agricultural education and research, protection 
against pests and prevention of plant diseases.
15. Preservation, protection and improvement of stock and prevention of 
animal diseases; veterinary training and practice.
16. Pounds and the prevention of cattle trespass.
17. Water, that is to say, water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage 
and embankments, water storage and water power subject to the provisions of 
entry 56 of List I. 
18. Land, that is to say, rights in or over land, land tenures including the 
relation of landlord and tenant, and the collection of rents; transfer and 
alienation of agricultural land; land improvement and agricultural loans; 
colonization.
1[19*      
*
*                          *                       *
20*      
*                       *                          *                        *]
21. Fisheries.
22. Courts of wards subject to the provisions of entry 34 of List I; 
encumbered and attached estates.
23. Regulation of mines and mineral development subject to the 
provisions of List I with respect to regulation and development under the 
control of the Union.
24. Industries subject to the provisions of 2[entries 7 and 52] of List I.
25. Gas and gas-works.
26. Trade and commerce within the State subject to the provisions of entry 
33 of List III.
______________________________________________
1. Entries 19 and 20 omitted  by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976,   
s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 28 for entry 52      
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
319
27. Production, supply and distribution of goods subject to the provisions 
of entry 33 of List III. 
28. Markets and fairs.
1[29*                    *                       *                        *                       *] 
30. Money-lending and money-lenders; relief of agricultural indebtedness.
31. Inns and inn-keepers.
32. Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other than 
those specified in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary, 
scientific, religious and other societies and associations; co-operative societies.
33. Theatres and dramatic performances; cinemas subject to the provisions 
of entry 60 of List I; sports, entertainments and amusements.
34. Betting and gambling. 
35. Works,  lands and buildings vested in or in the possession of the State.
2[36*                    *                       *                        *                       *] 
37. Elections to the Legislature of the State subject to the provisions of 
any law made by Parliament. 
38. Salaries and allowances of members of the Legislature of the State, of 
the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and, if there is a 
Legislative Council, of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman thereof.
39. Powers, privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of 
the members and the committees thereof, and, if there is a Legislative Council, 
of that Council and of the members and the committees thereof; enforcement of 
attendance of persons for giving evidence or producing documents before 
committees of the Legislature of the State.
40. Salaries and allowances of Ministers for the State.
41. State public services; State Public Service Commission.
42. State pensions, that is to say, pensions payable by the State or out of 
the Consolidated Fund of the State.
43. Public debt of the State.
44. Treasure trove.
______________________________________________
1. Entry 29 omitted  by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 
(w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Entry 36 omitted by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 26       
(w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
320
45. Land revenue, including the assessment and collection of revenue, the 
maintenance of land records, survey for revenue purposes and records of rights, 
and alienation of revenues.
46. Taxes on agricultural income.
47. Duties in respect of succession to agricultural land.
48. Estate duty in respect of agricultural land.
49. Taxes on lands and buildings.
50. Taxes on mineral rights subject to any limitations imposed by 
Parliament by law relating to mineral development.
51. Duties of excise on the following goods manufactured or produced in 
the State and countervailing duties at the same or lower rates on similar goods 
manufactured or produced elsewhere in India:—
(a) alcoholic liquors for human consumption; 
(b) opium, Indian hemp and other narcotic drugs and narcotics,
but not including medicinal and toilet preparations containing alcohol or any 
substance included in sub-paragraph (b) of this entry.
1[52. *                  *                  *                  *                  *                  *]
53. Taxes on the consumption or sale of electricity.
2[54. Taxes on the sale of petroleum crude, high speed diesel, motor spirit 
(commonly known as petrol), natural gas, aviation turbine fuel and alcoholic 
liquor for human consumption, but not including sale in the course of 
inter-State trade or commerce or sale in the course of international trade or 
commerce of such goods.]
3[55. *                  *                  *                  *                  *                  *]
56. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland 
waterways.
______________________________________________
1. Entry 52 omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, 
s. 17(b)(i) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Sixth Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11-9-1956) and 
further subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016,        
s. 17(b)(ii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).
3. Entry 55 omitted by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, 
s. 17(b)(iii) (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
321
57. Taxes on vehicles, whether mechanically propelled or not, suitable for 
use on roads, including tramcars subject to the provisions of entry 35 of List III.
58. Taxes on animals and boats. 
59. Tolls.
60. Taxes on professions, trades, callings and employments.
61. Capitation taxes.
1[62. Taxes on entertainments and amusements to the extent levied and 
collected by a Panchayat or a Municipality or a Regional Council or a District 
Council.]
63. Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified 
in the provisions of List I with regard to rates of stamp duty.
64. Offences against laws with respect to any of the matters in this List.
65. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with 
respect to any of the matters in this List.
66. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees 
taken in any court.
List III—Concurrent List
1. Criminal law, including all matters included in the Indian Penal Code 
at the commencement of this Constitution but excluding offences against laws 
with respect to any of the matters specified in List I or List II and excluding the 
use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces of the Union in aid 
of the civil power.
2. Criminal procedure, including all matters included in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution.
3. Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of a State, 
the maintenance of public order, or the maintenance of supplies and services 
essential to the community; persons subjected to such detention.
4. Removal from one State to another State of prisoners, accused persons 
and persons subjected to preventive detention for reasons specified in entry 3 of 
this List.
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (One Hundred and First Amendment) Act, 2016, s. 17(b)(iv), 
for entry 62 (w.e.f. 16-9-2016).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
322
5. Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; wills, intestacy 
and succession; joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which 
parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement of 
this Constitution subject to their personal law.
 6. Transfer of property other than agricultural land; registration of deeds 
and documents.
7.  Contracts, including partnership, agency, contracts of carriage, and 
other special forms of contracts, but not including contracts relating to 
agricultural land. 
 8.  Actionable wrongs.
 9.  Bankruptcy and insolvency.
10. Trust and Trustees.
11.  Administrators-general and official trustees. 
1[11A. Administration of Justice; constitution and organisation of all 
courts, except the Supreme Court and the High Courts.] 
12. Evidence and oaths; recognition of laws, public acts and records, and 
judicial proceedings.
13. Civil procedure, including all matters included in the Code of Civil 
Procedure at the commencement of this Constitution, limitation and arbitration.
14. Contempt of court, but not including contempt of the Supreme Court.
15. Vagrancy; nomadic and migratory tribes.
16. Lunacy and mental deficiency, including places for the reception or 
treatment of lunatics and mental deficients.
17. Prevention of cruelty to animals.
1[17A.  Forests.
17B. Protection of wild animals and birds.]
18. Adulteration of foodstuffs and other goods.
19. Drugs and poisons, subject to the provisions of entry 59 of List I with 
respect to opium.
20. Economic and social planning.
1[20A. Population control and family planning.]
______________________________________________
1. Entries 11A, 17A, 17B and 20A ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) 
Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
323
21. Commercial and industrial monopolies, combines and trusts.
22. Trade unions; industrial and labour disputes.
23. Social security and social insurance; employment and unemployment.
24. Welfare of labour including conditions of work, provident funds, 
employers' liability, workmen's compensation, invalidity and old age pensions 
and maternity benefits.
1[25. Education, including technical education, medical education and 
universities, subject to the provisions of entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of List I; 
vocational and technical training of labour.]
26. Legal, medical and other professions.
27. Relief and rehabilitation of persons displaced from their original place 
of residence by reason of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan.
28. Charities  and  charitable  institutions,  charitable 
and 
religious 
endowments and religious institutions.
29. Prevention of the extension from one State to another of infectious or 
contagious diseases or pests affecting men, animals or plants. 
30. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
31. Ports other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament or 
existing law to be major ports.
32. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically 
propelled vessels, and the rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage 
of passengers and goods on inland waterways subject to the provisions of List I 
with respect to national waterways.
2[33. Trade and commerce in, and the production, supply and distribution 
of,—
(a) the products of any industry where the control of such industry 
by the Union is declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest, and imported goods of the same kind as such products;
(b) foodstuffs, including edible oilseeds and oils;
(c) cattle fodder, including oilcakes and other concentrates;
(d) raw cotton, whether ginned or unginned, and cotton seed; and
(e) raw jute.]
______________________________________________
1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Third Amendment) Act, 1954, s. 2 for entry 33             
(w.e.f. 22-2-1955).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Seventh Schedule) 
324
1[33A. Weights and measures except establishment of standards.]
34.  Price control. 
35. Mechanically propelled vehicles including the principles on which 
taxes on such vehicles are to be levied.
36. Factories
37. Boilers.
38. Electricity. 
39. Newspapers, books and printing presses. 
40. Archaeological sites and remains other than those 2[declared by or 
under law made by Parliament] to be of national importance.
41. Custody, management and disposal of property (including agricultural 
land) declared by law to be evacuee property. 
3[42. Acquisition and requisitioning of property.]
43. Recovery in a State of claims in respect of taxes and other public 
demands, including arrears of land-revenue and sums recoverable as such 
arrears, arising outside that State.
44. Stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means of judicial 
stamps, but not including rates of stamp duty.
45. Inquiries and statistics for the purposes of any of the matters specified 
in List II or List III.
46. Jurisdiction and powers of all courts, except the Supreme Court, with 
respect to any of the matters in this List.
47. Fees in respect of any of the matters in this List, but not including fees 
taken in any court.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 57 (w.e.f. 3-1-1977).
2. Subs. by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 1956, s. 27, for "declared by 
Parliament by law" (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).
3.  Subs. by s. 26, ibid. for entry 42 (w.e.f. 1-11-1956).

325
EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 344(1) and 351]
Languages 
1.   Assamese.
2.   Bengali.
1[3.   Bodo. 
4.  Dogri.] 
2[5.] Gujarati.
3[6.] Hindi.
3[7.] Kannada.
3[8.]  Kashmiri. 
4[3[9.]   Konkani.]
1[10. Maithili.]
5[11.] Malayalam.
4[6[12.] Manipuri.]
6[13.] Marathi.
4[6[14.] Nepali.]
6[15.] 7[Odia].
6[16.] Punjabi.
6[17.] Sanskrit.
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
2. Entry 3 renumbered as entry 5 by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
3. Entries 4 to 7 renumbered as entries 6 to 9 by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
4. Ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-first Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31-8-1992).
5. Entry 8 renumbered as entry 11 by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act, 
2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
6. Entries 9 to 14 renumbered as entries 12 to 17 by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
7. Subs. by the Constitution (Ninety-sixth Amendment) Act, 2011, s. 2, for "Oriya" 
(w.e.f. 23-9-2011). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Eighth Schedule)
326
1[18.  Santhali.]
2[3[19.] Sindhi.]
4[20.] Tamil.
4[21.] Telugu.
           4[22.]  Urdu.   
______________________________________________
1. Ins. by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
2. Added by the Constitution (Twenty-first Amendment) Act, 1967, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-4-1967).  
3. Entry 15 renumbered as entry 19 by the Constitution (Ninety-second Amendment) 
Act, 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).
4. Entries 16 to 18 renumbered as entries 20 to 22 by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2004).

327
1[NINTH SCHEDULE
(Article 31B)
1. The Bihar Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXX of 1950).
2. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1948. (Bombay Act 
LXVII of 1948). 
3. The Bombay Maleki Tenure Abolition Act, 1949 (Bombay Act LXI of 1949).
4. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition Act, 1949. (Bombay Act LXII 
of 1949). 
5. The Panch Mahals Mehwassi Tenure Abolition Act, 1949. (Bombay Act 
LXIII of 1949).
6. The Bombay Khoti Abolition Act, 1950 (Bombay Act VI of 1950).
7. The Bombay Paragana and Kulkarni Watan Abolition Act, 1950. 
(Bombay Act LX of 1950).
8. The Madhya Pradesh Abolition of Proprietary Rights (Estates, Mahals, 
Alienated Lands) Act, 1950 (Madhya Pradesh Act I of 1951).
9. The Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) Act, 1948 
(Madras Act XXVI of 1948). 
10. The Madras Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) 
Amendment Act, 1950 (Madras Act I of 1950).
11. The Uttar Pradesh  Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 
(Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951).
12. The Hyderabad (Abolition of Jagirs) Regulation, 1358F (No. LXIX of 
1358, Fasli).
13. The Hyderabad Jagirs (Commutation) Regulation, 1359F (No. XXV of 
1359, Fasli).]
2[14. The Bihar Displaced Persons Rehabilitation (Acquisition of Land) 
Act, 1950 (Bihar Act XXXVIII of 1950). 
15. The United Provinces Land Acquisition (Rehabilitation of Refugees) 
Act, 1948 (U.P. Act XXVI of 1948).
16. The Resettlement of Displaced Persons (Land Acquisition) Act, 1948 
(Act LX of 1948).
17. Sections 52A to 52G of the Insurance Act, 1938 (Act IV of 1938), as inserted 
by section 42 of the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1950 (Act XLVII of 1950).
18. The Railway Companies (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1951 (Act LI of 1951).
______________________________________________
1. Ninth Schedule (entries 1 to 13) added by the Constitution (First Amendment)
Act, 1951, s. 14 (w.e.f. 18-6-1951).
2. Ninth Schedule (entries 14 to 20) added by the Constitution (Fourth Amendment) 
Act, 1955, s. 5 (w.e.f. 27-4-1955).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
328
19. Chapter III-A of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951 (Act LXV of 1951), as inserted by section 13 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 1953 (Act XXVI of 1953). 
20. The West Bengal Land Development and Planning Act, 1948 
(West Bengal Act XXI of 1948), as amended by West Bengal Act XXIX of 
1951.]
1[21. The Andhra Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1961 
(Andhra Pradesh Act X of 1961).
22. The Andhra Pradesh (Telangana Area) Tenancy and Agricultural Lands 
(Validation) Act, 1961 (Andhra Pradesh Act XXI of 1961).
23. The Andhra  Pradesh (Telangana Area) Ijara and Kowli Land 
Cancellation of Irregular Pattas and Abolition of Concessional Assessment   
Act, 1961 (Andhra Pradesh Act XXXVI of 1961).
24. The Assam State Acquisition of Lands belonging to Religious or 
Charitable Institution of Public Nature Act, 1959 (Assam Act IX of 1961).
25. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1953 (Bihar Act XX of 1954).
26. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) Act, 1961 (Bihar Act XII of 1962),  except section 28 of this Act.
27. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1954 
(Bombay Act I of 1955).
28. The Bombay Taluqdari Tenure Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1957 
(Bombay Act XVIII of 1958).
29. The Bombay Inams (Kutch Area) Abolition Act, 1958 (Bombay 
Act XCVIII of 1958).
30. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment) 
Act, 1960 (Gujarat Act XVI of 1960).
31. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling Act, 1960 (Gujarat Act XXVI 
of 1961).
32. The Sagbara and Mehwassi Estates (Proprietary Rights Abolition, etc.) 
Regulation, 1962 (Gujarat Regulation I of 1962).
______________________________________________
1. Entries 21 to 64 and Explanation added by the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) 
Act, 1964, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20-6-1964). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
329
33. The Gujarat Surviving Alienations Abolition Act, 1963 (Gujarat Act 
XXXIII of 1963), except in so far as this Act relates to an alienation referred to 
in sub-clause (d) of clause (3) of section 2 thereof.
34. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) Act, 1961 
(Maharashtra Act XXVII of 1961).
35. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Re-enactment, Validation 
and Further Amendment) Act, 1961 (Maharashtra Act XLV of 1961).
36. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act, 1950 
(Hyderabad Act XXI of 1950).
37. The Jenmikaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1960 (Kerala Act III of 1961).
38. The Kerala Land Tax Act, 1961 (Kerala Act XIII of 1961).
39. The Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (Kerala Act I of 1964).  
40. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959 (Madhya Pradesh 
Act XX of 1959). 
41. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1960 
(Madhya Pradesh Act XX of 1960).
42. 
The 
Madras 
Cultivating 
Tenants 
Protection 
Act, 
1955 
(Madras Act XXV of 1955).
43. The Madras Cultivating Tenants (Payment of Fair Rent) Act, 1956 
(Madras Act XXIV of 1956).
44. The Madras Occupants of Kudiyiruppu (Protection from Eviction) 
Act, 1961 (Madras Act XXXVIII of 1961).
45. The Madras Public Trusts (Regulation of Administration of 
Agricultural Lands) Act, 1961 (Madras Act LVII of 1961).
46. The Madras Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 
(Madras Act LVIII of 1961).
47. The Mysore  Tenancy Act, 1952 (Mysore Act XIII of 1952).
48. The Coorg Tenants Act, 1957 (Mysore Act XIV of 1957).
49. The Mysore Village Offices Abolition Act, 1961 (Mysore Act XIV of 1961).
50. The Hyderabad Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Validation) Act, 1961 
(Mysore Act XXXVI of 1961).
51. The Mysore Land Reforms Act, 1961 (Mysore Act X of 1962).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
330
52. The Orissa Land Reforms Act, 1960 (Orissa Act XVI of 1960).
53. The Orissa Merged Territories (Village Offices Abolition) Act, 1963 
(Orissa Act X of 1963). 
54. The Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 (Punjab Act X of 1953).
55. The Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act III of 1955).
56. The Rajasthan Zamindari and Biswedari Abolition Act, 1959 
(Rajasthan Act VIII of 1959).
57. The Kumaun and Uttarakhand Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms 
Act, 1960 (Uttar Pradesh Act XVII of 1960).
58. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960 
(Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1961).
59. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 (West Bengal Act I of 1954).
60. The West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 (West Bengal Act X of 1956).  
61. The Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954 (Delhi Act VIII of 1954). 
62. The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Act, 1960 (Central Act 24 of 1960).
63. The Manipur Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960 
(Central Act 33 of 1960).
64. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms Act, 1960 
(Central Act 43 of 1960).
1[65. 
The 
Kerala 
Land 
Reforms 
(Amendment) 
Act, 
1969 
(Kerala Act 35 of 1969).
66. 
The 
Kerala 
Land 
Reforms 
(Amendment) 
Act, 
1971 
(Kerala Act 25 of 1971).]
2[67. The Andhra Pradesh Land Reforms (Ceiling on Agricultural 
Holdings) Act, 1973 (Andhra Pradesh Act 1 of 1973).
68. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Bihar Act I of 1973).
______________________________________________
1. Entries 65 and 66 ins. by the Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1972, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 9-6-1972).
2. Entries 67 and 86 ins.. by the Constitution (Thirty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1974, s. 2 
(w.e.f. 7-9-1974).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
331
69. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1973 (Bihar Act IX of 1973).
70. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Bihar Act V of  
1972). 
71. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act, 1972 
(Gujarat Act 2 of 1974).
72. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1972 (Haryana Act 26 of 1972). 
73. The Himachal Pradesh Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1972 (Himachal 
Pradesh Act 19 of 1973).
74. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Kerala Act 17 of 1972). 
75. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) 
Act, 1972 (Madhya Pradesh Act 12 of 1974).
76. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1972 (Madhya Pradesh Act 13 of 1974). 
77. 
The 
Mysore 
Land 
Reforms 
(Amendment) 
Act, 
1973 
(Karnataka Act 1 of 1974).
78. The Punjab Land Reforms Act, 1972 (Punjab Act 10 of 1973).
79. The Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 
1973 (Rajasthan Act 11 of 1973).
80. The Gudalur Janmam Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari) 
Act, 1969 (Tamil Nadu Act 24 of 1969).
81.  The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1972 (West 
Bengal Act XII of 1972).
82. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1964 (West 
Bengal Act XXII of 1964).
83. The West Bengal Estates Acquisition (Second Amendment) Act, 1973 
(West Bengal Act XXXIII of 1973).
84. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Gujarat Amendment) 
Act, 1972 (Gujarat Act 5 of 1973).
85. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Orissa Act 9 of 
1974).
86. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms (Second Amendment) 
Act, 1974 (Tripura Act 7 of 1974).]

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
332
1[287* 
*                       * 
* 
*]
88. The Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (Central Act 
65 of 1951). 
89. The Requisitioning and Acquisition of Immovable Property Act, 1952 
(Central Act 30 of 1952). 
90. The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 
(Central Act 67 of 1957).
91. The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (Central 
Act 54 of 1969).
2[92*                    *                   *                        * 
 *]
93. The Coking Coal Mines (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1971 (Central 
Act 64 of 1971). 
94. The Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (Central Act 36 of 
1972). 
95. The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (Central 
Act 57 of 1972).
96. The Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1972 
(Central Act 58 of 1972).
97. The Sick Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Management) Act, 
1972 (Central Act 72 of 1972).
98. The Coal Mines (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1973 (Central Act 
15 of 1973).
99. The Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 (Central Act 26 of 1973).
100. The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (Central Act 46 of 
1973).
101. The Alcock Ashdown Company Limited (Acquisition of Under-
takings) Act, 1973 (Central Act 56 of 1973).
______________________________________________
1. Entries 87 to 124  ins. by the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act, 1975, s. 5 
(w.e.f. 10-8-1975).
2. Entries 87 and 92 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978,    
s. 44 (w.e.f. 20-6-1979).
Rep. by the Competition Act, 2002 (12 of 2003) s. 66 (w.e.f. 1-9-2009).
Rep. by the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), s. 49 (w.e.f. 1-6-2000).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
333
102. The Coal Mines (Conservation and Development) Act, 1974 (Central 
Act 28 of 1974). 
103. The Additional Emoluments (Compulsory Deposit) Act, 1974 (Central 
Act 37 of 1974). 
104. The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling 
Activities Act, 1974 (Central Act 52 of 1974).
105. The Sick Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1974 (Central 
Act 57 of 1974).
106. The  Maharashtra Agricultural Lands  (Ceiling  on  Holdings) 
(Amendment) Act, 1964 (Maharashtra Act XVI of 1965).
107. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) 
(Amendment) Act, 1965 (Maharashtra Act XXXII of 1965).
108. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) 
(Amendment) Act, 1968 (Maharashtra Act XVI of 1968).
109. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1968 (Maharashtra Act XXXIII of 1968).
110. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) 
(Amendment) Act, 1969 (Maharashtra Act XXXVII of 1969).
111. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1969 (Maharashtra Act XXXVIII of 1969).
112. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling
on
Holdings) 
(Amendment) Act, 1970 (Maharashtra Act XXVII of 1970).
113. The Maharashtra Agricultural
Lands
(Ceiling
on
Holdings) 
(Amendment) Act, 1972 (Maharashtra Act XIII of 1972).
114. The 
Maharashtra
Agricultural
Lands 
(Ceiling on Holdings) 
(Amendment) Act, 1973 (Maharashtra Act L of 1973).
115. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965 (Orissa Act 13 of 
1965).
116. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1966 (Orissa Act 8 of 
1967).
117. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1967 (Orissa Act 13 of 
1967). 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
334
118. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 (Orissa Act 13 of 
1969).
119. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1970 (Orissa Act 18 of 
1970).
120. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings 
(Amendment) Act, 1972 (Uttar Pradesh  Act 18 of 1973).
121. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings 
(Amendment) Act, 1974 (Uttar Pradesh  Act 2 of 1975).
122. The Tripura Land Revenue and Land Reforms  (Third Amendment) 
Act, 1975 (Tripura Act 3 of 1975).
123.The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms Regulation, 1971 (3 of 1971).
124. The Dadra and Nagar Haveli Land Reforms (Amendment)  
Regulation, 1973 (5 of 1973).]
1[125. Section 66A and Chapter IVA of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
(Central Act 4 of 1939).
126. The Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (Central Act 10 of 1955).
127. The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of 
Property) Act, 1976 (Central Act 13 of 1976).
128. The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 (Central Act 19 of 
1976).
129. The Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling 
Activities (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Central Act 20 of 1976).
2130*                       *                          *                        *  
*
131. The Levy Sugar Price Equalisation Fund Act, 1976 (Central Act 31 of 
1976).
132. The Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 (Central Act 33 
of 1976).
______________________________________________
1. Entries 125 to 188 ins. by the Constitution (Fortieth Amendment) Act, 1976, s. 3 
(w.e.f. 27-5-1976).
See now the relevant provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988).
2. Entry 130 omitted by the Constitution (Forty-fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, s. 44 
(w.e.f. 20-6-1979).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
335
133. The Departmentalisation of Union Accounts (Transfer of Personnel) 
Act, 1976 (Central Act 59 of 1976).
134. The Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1956 (Assam 
Act I of 1957). 
135. The Bombay Tenancy and Agricultural Lands (Vidarbha Region) Act, 
1958 (Bombay Act XCIX of 1958).
136. The Gujarat Private Forests (Acquisition) Act, 1972 (Gujarat Act 14 
of 1973). 
137. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1976 
(Haryana Act 17 of 1976).
138. The Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land Reforms Act, 1972 
(Himachal Pradesh Act 8 of 1974).
139. The Himachal Pradesh Village Common Lands Vesting and 
Utilisation Act, 1974 (Himachal Pradesh Act 18 of 1974).
140. The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment and Miscellaneous 
Provisions) Act, 1974 (Karnataka Act 31 of 1974).
141. The Karnataka Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 
(Karnataka Act 27 of 1976).
142. The Kerala Prevention of Eviction Act, 1966 (Kerala Act 12 of 1966).
143. The Thiruppuvaram Payment (Abolition) Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 19 of 1969).
144. The Sreepadam Lands Enfranchisement Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 20 of 
1969).
145. The Sree Pandaravaka Lands (Vesting and Enfranchisement) Act, 
1971 (Kerala Act 20 of 1971).
146. The Kerala Private Forests (Vesting and Assignment) Act, 1971 
(Kerala Act 26 of 1971).
147. The Kerala Agricultural Workers Act, 1974 (Kerala Act 18 of 1974).
148. The Kerala Cashew Factories (Acquisition) Act, 1974 (Kerala Act 29 
of 1974).
149. The Kerala Chitties Act, 1975 (Kerala Act 23 of 1975).
150. The Kerala Scheduled Tribes (Restriction on Transfer of Lands and 
Restoration of Alienated Lands) Act, 1975 (Kerala Act 31 of 1975).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
336
151.  The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Kerala Act 15 of 
1976). 
152. The Kanam Tenancy Abolition Act, 1976 (Kerala Act 16 of 1976). 
153. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) 
Act, 1974 (Madhya Pradesh Act 20 of 1974).
154. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings  (Amendment) 
Act, 1975 (Madhya Pradesh Act 2 of 1976).
155. The West Khandesh Mehwassi Estates (Proprietary Rights Abolition, 
etc.) Regulation, 1961 (Maharashtra Regulation 1 of 1962).
156. The Maharashtra Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes Act, 1974 
(Maharashtra Act XIV of 1975).
157. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on 
Holdings) and (Amendment) Act, 1972 (Maharashtra Act XXI of 1975).
158. The Maharashtra Private Forest (Acquisition) Act, 1975 (Maharashtra 
Act XXIX of 1975).
159. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Lowering of Ceiling on 
Holdings) and (Amendment) Amendment Act, 1975 (Maharashtra Act XLVII 
of 1975).
160. The Maharashtra Agricultural Lands (Ceiling on Holdings) 
(Amendment) Act, 1975 (Maharashtra Act II of 1976). 
161. The Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1951 (Orissa Act I of 1952).
162. The Rajasthan Colonisation Act, 1954 (Rajasthan Act XXVII of 1954).
163. The Rajasthan Land Reforms and Acquisition of Landowners’ Estates 
Act, 1963 (Rajasthan Act 11 of 1964).
164. The Rajasthan Imposition of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (Rajasthan Act 8 of 1976).
165. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Rajasthan Act 12 of 
1976).
166. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Reduction of Ceiling on Land) Act, 
1970  (Tamil Nadu Act 17 of 1970).
167. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1971 (Tamil Nadu Act 41 of 1971).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
337
168.  The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1972). 
169. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second 
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 20 of 1972). 
170. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third 
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 37 of 1972).
171. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fourth 
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 39 of 1972). 
172. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Sixth 
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 1974).
173. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Fifth 
Amendment Act, 1972 (Tamil Nadu Act 10 of 1974).
174. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1974 (Tamil Nadu Act 15 of 1974). 
175. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Third 
Amendment Act, 1974 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1974).
176. The Tamil Nadu  Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second 
Amendment Act, 1974 (Tamil Nadu Act 32 of 1974).
177. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1975).
178. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second 
Amendment Act, 1975 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1975).
179. Amendments made to the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition and 
Land Reforms Act, 1950 (Uttar Pradesh Act I of 1951) by the Uttar Pradesh 
Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Uttar Pradesh Act 21 of 1971) and the 
Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1974 (Uttar Pradesh Act 34 of 
1974).
180. The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (Uttar Pradesh Act 20 of 1976). 
181. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1972 
(West Bengal Act XXVIII of 1972).
182. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land Act, 1973 (West 
Bengal Act XXIII of 1973).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
338
183. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1974 (West 
Bengal Act XXXIII of 1974).
184. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1975 (West 
Bengal Act XXIII of 1975).
185. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (West 
Bengal Act XII of 1976).
186. The Delhi Land Holdings (Ceiling) Amendment Act, 1976 (Central 
Act 15 of 1976).
187. The Goa, Daman and Diu Mundkars (Protection from Eviction) Act, 
1975 (Goa, Daman and Diu Act 1 of 1976).
188. The Pondicherry Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 
1973 (Pondicherry Act 9 of 1974).]
1[189. The Assam (Temporarily Settled Areas) Tenancy Act, 1971 (Assam 
Act XXIII of 1971). 
190. The Assam (Temporarily Settled Areas) Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 
1974 (Assam Act XVIII of 1974).
191. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Amending Act, 1974 (Bihar Act 13 of 1975).
192. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Bihar Act 22 of 1976).
193. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1978 (Bihar Act VII of 1978).
194. The Land Acquisition (Bihar Amendment) Act, 1979 (Bihar Act 2 of 
1980).
195. The Haryana Ceiling on Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1977 
(Haryana Act 14 of 1977).
196. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1978 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1978).
197. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1979 (Tamil Nadu Act 11 of 1979).
______________________________________________
1. Entries 189 to 202 were ins. by the Constitution (Forty-seventh Amendment)            
Act, 1984, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-8-1984).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
339
198. The Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition Laws (Amendment) Act, 1978 
(Uttar Pradesh Act 15 of 1978).
199. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act, 
1978 (West Bengal Act XXIV of 1978).
200. The West Bengal Restoration of Alienated Land (Amendment) Act, 
1980 (West Bengal Act LVI of 1980).
201. The Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy Act, 1964 (Goa, 
Daman and Diu Act 7 of 1964).
202. The Goa, Daman and Diu Agricultural Tenancy (Fifth Amendment) 
Act, 1976 (Goa, Daman and Diu Act 17 of 1976).]
1[203. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer Regulation, 
1959 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1959).
204. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Laws (Extension and 
Amendment) Regulation, 1963 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 2 of 1963). 
205. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment) 
Regulation, 1970 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1970).
206. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment) 
Regulation, 1971 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1971).
207. The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Areas Land Transfer (Amendment) 
Regulation, 1978 (Andhra Pradesh Regulation 1 of 1978).
208. The Bihar Tenancy Act, 1885 (Bihar Act 8 of 1885).
209. The Chota Nagpur Tenancy Act, 1908 (Bengal Act 6 of 1908) 
(Chapter VIII—sections 46, 47, 48, 48A and 49; Chapter X—sections 71, 71A 
and 71B; and Chapter XVIII—sections 240, 241 and 242).
210. The Santhal Parganas Tenancy (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 1949 
(Bihar Act 14 of 1949) except section 53.
211. The Bihar Scheduled Areas Regulation, 1969 (Bihar Regulation 1 of 1969).
212. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1982 (Bihar Act 55 of 1982).
______________________________________________
1. Entries 203 to 257 were ins. by the Constitution (Sixty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1990,   
s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-6-1990).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
340
213. The Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition Act, 1969 (Gujarat Act 16 of 
1969). 
214. The Gujarat Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Gujarat Act 37 
of 1976). 
215. The Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling (Amendment) Act, 1976 
(President's Act 43 of 1976).
216. The Gujarat Devasthan Inams Abolition (Amendment) Act, 1977 
(Gujarat Act 27 of 1977).
217. The Gujarat Tenancy Laws (Amendment) Act, 1977 (Gujarat Act 30 
of 1977).
218. The Bombay Land Revenue (Gujarat Second Amendment) Act, 1980 
(Gujarat Act 37 of 1980).
219. The Bombay Land Revenue Code and Land Tenure Abolition Laws 
(Gujarat Amendment) Act, 1982 (Gujarat Act 8 of 1982).
220. The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) Act, 1968 
(Himachal Pradesh Act 15 of 1969).
221. The Himachal Pradesh Transfer of Land (Regulation) (Amendment) 
Act, 1986 (Himachal Pradesh Act 16 of 1986).
222. The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of 
Transfer of Certain Lands) Act, 1978 (Karnataka Act 2 of 1979). 
223. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1978 (Kerala Act 13 of 1978).
224. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981 (Kerala Act 19 of 
1981).
225. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Third Amendment) Act, 
1976 (Madhya Pradesh Act 61 of 1976).
226. The Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code (Amendment) Act, 1980 
(Madhya Pradesh Act 15 of 1980).
227. The Madhya Pradesh Akrishik Jot Uchchatam Seema Adhiniyam, 
1981 (Madhya Pradesh Act 11 of 1981).
228. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1976 (Madhya Pradesh Act 1 of 1984).
229. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) 
Act, 1984 (Madhya Pradesh Act 14 of 1984).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
341
230. The Madhya Pradesh Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings (Amendment) 
Act, 1989 (Madhya Pradesh Act 8 of 1989).
231. The Maharashtra Land Revenue Code, 1966 (Maharashtra Act 41 of 
1966), sections 36, 36A and 36B. 
232. The Maharashtra Land Revenue
Code
and
the Maharashtra 
Restoration of Lands to Scheduled Tribes (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 
(Maharashtra Act 30 of 1977).
233. The Maharashtra Abolition of Subsisting Proprietary Rights to Mines 
and Minerals in certain Lands Act, 1985 (Maharashtra Act 16 of 1985).
234. The Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of Immovable Property (by 
Scheduled Tribes) Regulation, 1956 (Orissa Regulation 2 of 1956).
235. The Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1975 (Orissa 
Act 29 of 1976). 
236. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa Act 30 of 1976). 
237. The Orissa Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1976 (Orissa 
Act 44 of 1976).
238. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Rajasthan Act 
12 of 1984).
239. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Rajasthan Act 13 of 
1984).
240. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1987 (Rajasthan Act 21 of 
1987).
241. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second 
Amendment Act, 1979 (Tamil Nadu Act 8 of 1980).
242. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1980 (Tamil Nadu Act 21 of 1980).
243. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1981 (Tamil Nadu Act 59 of 1981).
244. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second 
Amendment Act, 1983 (Tamil Nadu Act 2 of 1984).
245. The Uttar Pradesh Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 1982 (Uttar Pradesh 
Act 20 of 1982).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
342
246. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1965 (West 
Bengal Act 18 of 1965).
247. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1966 (West 
Bengal Act 11 of 1966).
248. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1969 
(West Bengal Act 23 of 1969).
249. The West Bengal Estate Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1977 (West 
Bengal Act 36 of 1977).
250. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue Act, 1979 (West Bengal Act 
44 of 1979).
251. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1980 (West 
Bengal Act 41 of 1980).
252. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1981 
(West Bengal Act 33 of 1981).
253. The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) Act, 1981 
(West Bengal Act 37 of 1981).
254. The West Bengal Land Holding Revenue (Amendment) Act, 1982 
(West Bengal Act 23 of 1982).
255. The Calcutta Thikka Tenancy (Acquisition and Regulation) 
(Amendment) Act, 1984 (West Bengal Act 41 of 1984).
256. The Mahe Land Reforms Act, 1968 (Pondicherry Act 1 of 1968).
257. The Mahe Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1980 (Pondicherry Act 1 
of 1981).]
1[257A. The Tamil Nadu Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes (Reservation of Seats in Educational Institutions and of 
appointments or posts in the Services under the State) Act, 1993 (Tamil Nadu 
Act 45 of 1994).]
______________________________________________
1. Entry 257A ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-sixth Amendment) Act, 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 
31-8-1994).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
343
1[258. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy Act, 1947 (Bihar 
Act 4 of 1948). 
259. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation 
Act, 1956 (Bihar Act 22 of 1956). 
260. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation 
(Amendment) Act, 1970 (Bihar Act 7 of 1970).
261. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 
1970 (Bihar Act 9 of 1970). 
262. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation 
(Amendment) Act, 1973 (Bihar Act 27 of 1975).
263. The Bihar Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation 
(Amendment) Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 35 of 1982).
264. The Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1987 (Bihar Act 21 of 1987).
265. The Bihar Privileged Persons Homestead Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 
1989 (Bihar Act 11 of 1989).
266. The Bihar Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Bihar Act 11 of 1990).
267. The Karnataka Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prohibition of 
Transfer of Certain Lands) (Amendment) Act, 1984 (Karnataka Act 3 of 1984).
268. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Kerala Act 16 of 1989).
269. The Kerala Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1989 (Kerala 
Act 2 of 1990).
270. The Orissa Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Orissa Act 9 of 
1990).
271. The Rajasthan Tenancy (Amendment) Act, 1979 (Rajasthan Act 16 of 1979).
272. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1987 (Rajasthan Act 2 
of 1987).
273. The Rajasthan Colonisation (Amendment) Act, 1989 (Rajasthan Act 
12 of 1989).
______________________________________________
1. Entries 258 to 284 ins. by the Constitution (Seventy-eighth Amendment)  Act, 1995,    
s. 2 (w.e.f. 30-8-1995).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Ninth Schedule)
344
274. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1983 (Tamil Nadu Act 3 of 1984). 
275. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
Amendment Act, 1986 (Tamil Nadu Act 57 of 1986). 
276. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Second 
Amendment Act, 1987 (Tamil Nadu Act 4 of 1988).
277. The Tamil Nadu Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) 
(Amendment) Act, 1989 (Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1989). 
278. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1981 (West 
Bengal Act 50 of 1981).
279. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1986 (West 
Bengal Act 5 of 1986).
280. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Second Amendment) Act, 1986 
(West Bengal Act 19 of 1986).
281. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Third Amendment) Act, 1986 (West 
Bengal Act 35 of 1986).
282. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1989 (West 
Bengal Act 23 of 1989).
283. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1990 (West 
Bengal Act 24 of 1990).
284. The West Bengal Land Reforms Tribunal Act, 1991 (West Bengal Act 
12 of 1991).]
Explanation:—Any acquisition made under the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 
1955 (Rajasthan Act 3 of 1955), in contravention of the second proviso to 
clause(1) of article 31A shall, to the entent of the contravention, be void.]

345
1[TENTH SCHEDULE
[Articles 102(2) and 191(2)]
Provisions as to disqualification on ground of defection 
1. Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "House" means either House of Parliament or the Legislative 
Assembly or, as the case may be, either House of the Legislature of a State;
(b) "legislature party", in relation to a member of a House 
belonging to any political party in accordance with the provisions of 
paragraph 2 or 2*** paragraph 4, means the group consisting of all the 
members of that House for the time being belonging to that political 
party in accordance with the said provisions; 
(c) "original political party", in relation to a member of a House, 
means the political party to which he belongs for the purposes of sub-
paragraph (1) of paragraph 2;
(d) "paragraph" means a paragraph of this Schedule.
2. Disqualification on ground of defection.—(1) Subject to the 
provisions of 3[paragraphs 4 and 5], a member of a House belonging to any 
political party shall be disqualified for being a member of the House—
(a) if he has voluntarily given up his membership of such political 
party; or
(b) if he votes or abstains from voting in such House contrary to 
any direction issued by the political party to which he belongs or by any 
person or authority authorised by it in this behalf, without obtaining, in 
either case, the prior permission of such political party, person or 
authority and such voting or abstention has not been condoned by such 
political party, person or authority within fifteen days from the date of 
such voting or abstention.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,—
(a) an elected member of a House shall be deemed to belong to 
the political party, if any, by which he was set up as a candidate for 
election as such member;
(b) a nominated member of a House shall,—
______________________________________________
1. Tenth Schedule added by the Constitution (Fifty-second Amendment) Act, 1985, s. 6 
(w.e.f. 1-3-1985).
2. Certain words omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5 
(w.e.f. 1-1-2004).
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for "paragraphs 3, 4 and 5" (w.e.f. 1-1-2004).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Tenth Schedule)
346
(i) where he is a member of any political party on the date 
of his nomination as such member, be deemed to belong to such 
political party;
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to belong to the political 
party of which he becomes, or, as the case may be, first becomes, 
a member before the expiry of six months from the date on which 
he takes his seat after complying with the requirements of article 
99 or, as the case may be, article 188.
(2) An elected member of a House who has been elected as such otherwise 
than as a candidate set up by any political party shall be disqualified for being a 
member of the House if he joins any political party after such election.
(3) A nominated member of a House shall be disqualified for being a 
member of the House if he joins any political party after the expiry of six 
months from the date on which he takes his seat after complying with the 
requirements of article 99 or, as the case may be, article 188.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of 
this paragraph, a person who, on the commencement of the Constitution (Fifty-
second Amendment) Act, 1985, is a member of a House (whether elected or 
nominated as such) shall,—
(i) where he was a member of political party immediately before 
such commencement, be deemed, for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) 
of this paragraph, to have been elected as a member of such House as a 
candidate set up by such political party;
(ii) in any other case, be deemed to be an elected member of the 
House who has been elected as such otherwise than as a candidate set up 
by any political party for the purposes of sub-paragraph (2) of this 
paragraph or, as the case may be, be deemed to be a nominated member 
of the House for the purposes of sub-paragraph (3) of this paragraph.
1*                       *                       *                 
*                       *
4. Disqualification on ground of defection not to apply in case of 
merger.— (1) A member of a House shall not be disqualified under 
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 where his original political party merges with 
another political party and he claims that he and any other members of his 
original political party—
(a) have become members of such other political party or, as the 
case may be, of a new political party formed by such merger; or
(b) have not accepted the merger and opted to function as a 
separate group,
______________________________________________
1. Paragraph 3 omitted by the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003, s. 5 
(w.e.f. 1-1-2004).

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Tenth Schedule)
347
and from the time of such merger, such other political party or new political 
party or group, as the  case may be, shall be deemed to be the political party to 
which he belongs for the purposes of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 and to 
be his original political party for the purposes of this sub-paragraph.
(2) For the purposes of  sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph, the merger 
of the  original political party of a member of a House shall be deemed to have 
taken place if, and only if, not less than two-thirds of the members of the 
legislature party concerned have agreed to such merger.
5. Exemption.—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule,  a 
person who has been elected to the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker 
of the House of the People or the Deputy Chairman of the Council  of States or 
the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State or 
the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State, shall 
not be disqualified under this Schedule,—
(a) if he, by reason of his election to such office, voluntarily gives 
up the membership of the political party to which he belonged 
immediately before such election and does not, so long as he continues 
to hold such office thereafter, rejoin that political party or become a 
member of  another political party; or
(b) if he, having given up by reason of his election to  such office his 
membership of the political party to which he belonged immediately before 
such  election, rejoins such political  party after he ceases to hold such office.
6. Decision on questions as to disqualification on  ground of 
defection.—(1) If any question arises as to whether a member of  a House has 
become subject to disqualification  under this Schedule, the question shall be 
referred for the decision of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Speaker of 
such House and his decision shall be final:
Provided that where the question which has arisen is as to whether the 
Chairman or the Speaker of a House has become subject to such disqualification, 
the question shall be referred for the decision of such member of the House as the 
House may elect in this behalf and his decision shall be final.
(2) All proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph in relation 
to any question as to disqualification of a member of a House under this 
Schedule shall be deemed to be proceedings in Parliament within the meaning 
of article 122 or, as the case may be, proceedings in the Legislature of a State 
within the meaning of article 212.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Tenth Schedule)
348
*7. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.—Notwithstanding anything in this 
Constitution, no court shall have any jurisdiction in respect of any matter 
connected with the disqualification of a member of a House under this Schedule.
8. Rules.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-paragraph (2) of this 
paragraph, the Chairman or the Speaker of a House may make rules for giving 
effect to the provisions of this Schedule, and in particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, such rules may provide for—
(a) the maintenance of registers or other records as to the political 
parties, if any, to which different members of the House belong;
(b) the report which the leader of a legislature party in relation to a 
member of a House shall furnish with regard to any condonation of the 
nature referred to in clause (b) of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 in 
respect of such member, the time within which and the authority to 
whom such report shall be furnished; 
(c) the reports which a political party shall furnish with regard to 
admission to such political party of any members of the House and the 
officer of the House to whom such reports shall be furnished; and
(d) the procedure for deciding any question referred to in 
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6 including the procedure for any inquiry 
which may be made for the purpose of deciding such question.
(2) The rules made by the Chairman or the Speaker of a House under 
sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be laid as soon as may be after they 
are made before the House for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and shall take 
effect upon the expiry of the said period of thirty days unless they are sooner 
approved with or without modifications or disapproved by the House and 
where they are so approved, they shall take effect on such approval in the form 
in which they were laid or in such modified form, as the case may be, and 
where they are so disapproved, they shall be of no effect.
(3) The Chairman or the Speaker of a House may, without prejudice to 
the provisions of article 105 or, as the case may be, article 194, and to any other 
power which he may have under this Constitution direct that any wilful 
contravention by any person of the rules made under this paragraph may be 
dealt with in the same manner as a breach of privilege of the House.]
______________________________________________
* Paragraph 7 declared  invalid for want of ratification in accordance with the proviso to clause (2) of 
article 368 as per majority opinion in Kihoto Hollohon Vs. Zachilhu and Others A.I.R. 1993 
SC 412.

349
1[ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
(Article 243G)
1.
Agriculture, including agricultural extension.
2. 
Land improvement, implementation of land reforms, land 
consolidation and soil conservation.
3.
Minor 
irrigation, 
water 
management 
and 
watershed 
development.
4. 
Animal husbandry, dairying and poultry.
5. 
Fisheries.
6.
Social forestry and farm forestry.
7. 
Minor forest produce.
8. 
Small scale industries, including food processing industries.
9.
Khadi, village and cottage industries.
10.
Rural housing.
11.
Drinking water.
12. 
Fuel and fodder.
13.
Roads, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other means of          
communication.
14.
Rural electrification, including distribution of electricity.
15.
Non-conventional energy sources.
16.
Poverty alleviation programme.
17.
Education, including primary and secondary schools.
18.
Technical training and vocational education.
19.
Adult and non-formal education.
20.
Libraries.
21.
Cultural activities.
22.
Markets and fairs.
23.
Health and sanitation, including hospitals, primary health 
centres and   dispensaries.
24.
Family welfare.
25.
Women and child development.
26.
Social welfare, including welfare of the handicapped and 
mentally retarded.
27.
Welfare of the weaker sections, and in particular, of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
28.
Public distribution system.
29.        Maintenance of community assets.]
______________________________________________
1. Eleventh Schedule added by the Constitution (Seventy-third Amendment) Act, 1992, 
s. 4 (w.e.f. 24-4-1993).

350
1[TWELFTH SCHEDULE
(Article 243W)
1.
Urban planning including town planning.
2. 
Regulation of land-use and construction of buildings.
3. 
Planning for economic and social development. 
4.
Roads and bridges.
5.
Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes.
6.
Public health, sanitation conservancy and solid waste 
management.
7. 
Fire services.
8. 
Urban forestry, protection of the environment and promotion of 
ecological aspects.
9.
Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society, 
including the handicapped and mentally retarded.
10.
Slum improvement and upgradation.
11.
Urban poverty alleviation.
12. 
Provision of urban amenities and facilities such as parks, 
gardens, playgrounds.
13.
Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.
14.
Burials and burial grounds; cremations, cremation grounds; and 
electric crematoriums.
15. 
Cattle pounds; prevention of cruelty to animals.
16.
Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.
17.
Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops 
and public conveniences.
18.
Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.]
______________________________________________
1. Twelfth Schedule added by the Constitution (Seventy-fourth Amendment) Act, 1992, s. 4
(w.e.f. 1-6-1993). 

351
APPENDIX I
THE CONSTITUTION ( ONE HUNDREDTH AMENDMENT)
ACT, 2015
[28th May, 2015.]
An Act further to amend the Constitution of India to give effect to the acquiring 
of territories by India and transfer of certain territories to Bangladesh in 
pursuance of the agreement and its protocol entered into between the 
Governments of India and Bangladesh.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
1. Short title.—This Act may be called the Constitution (One Hundredth 
Amendment) Act, 2015.     
2.  Definitions.—In this Act,— 
(a) “acquired territory” means so much of the territories comprised in 
the India-Bangladesh agreement and its protocol and referred to in the 
First Schedule as are demarcated for the purpose of being acquired by 
India from Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreement and its protocol 
referred to in clause (c);
(b) “appointed day” means such date as the Central Government 
may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as the date for 
acquisition of territories from Bangladesh and transfer of the territories to 
Bangladesh in pursuance of the India-Bangladesh agreement and its 
protocol, after causing the territories to be so acquired and transferred as 
referred to in the First Schedule and Second Schedule and demarcated for the 
purpose;
(c) “India-Bangladesh agreement” means the agreement between the 
Government of the Republic of India and the Government of the People’s 
Republic of Bangladesh
concerning the Demarcation of the Land 
Boundary between India and Bangladesh and Related Matters dated the 
16th day of May, 1974, Exchange of Letters dated the 26th day of 
December, 1974, the 30th day of December, 1974, the 7th day of October,
1982, the 26th day of March, 1992 and protocol to the said agreement dated 
the 6th day of September, 2011, entered into between the Governments of 
India and Bangladesh, the relevant extracts of which are set out in the 
Third Schedule;
______________________________________________
 31st day of July, 2015, vide notification No. S.O. 2094(E), dated 31st July, 2015. 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
352
(d) “transferred territory”, means so much of the territories 
comprised in the
India-Bangladesh agreement and its protocol and 
referred to in the Second Schedule as are demarcated for the purpose of 
being transferred by India to Bangladesh in pursuance of the agreements 
and its protocol referred to in clause (c).
3. Amendment of  First  Schedule  to Constitution.— As from the 
appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitution,—
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of  
Assam, the words, brackets and figures “and the territories referred to in 
Part I of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth 
Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause 
(a) of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far 
as it relates to the territories referred to in Part I of the Second Schedule 
to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015”, shall be 
added at the end; 
(b) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of West 
Bengal, the words, brackets and figures “and also the territories referred to 
in Part III of the First Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in 
Part III of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth 
Amendment) Act, 2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c) 
of section 3 of the Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it 
relates to the territories referred to in Part III of the First Schedule and the 
territories referred to in Part III of the Second Schedule to the 
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015”, shall be added at 
the end;
(c) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of 
Meghalaya, the words, brackets and figures “and the territories referred to in 
Part I of the First Schedule but excluding the territories referred to in Part 
II of the Second Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth 
Amendment) Act, 2015”, shall be added at the end;
(d) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Tripura, 
the words, brackets and figures “and the territories referred to in Part II of the 
First Schedule to the Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 
2015, notwithstanding anything contained in clause (d) of section 3 of the 
Constitution (Ninth Amendment) Act, 1960, so far as it relates to the 
territories referred to in Part II of the First Schedule to the Constitution 
(One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015”, shall be added at the end.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
353
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(a), 2(b) and 3]
PA R T I
The acquired territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the 
16th day of May, 1974 and Article 3 (I) (b) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) of the protocol dated the 
6th day of September, 2011. 
PA RT I I 
The acquired territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the 
16th day of May, 1974 and Article 3 (I) (c) (i) of the protocol dated the 6th day of 
September, 2011. 
PART   III 
The acquired territory in relation to Articles 1(12) and 2 of the agreement 
dated the 16th day of May, 1974 and Articles 2 (II), 3 (I) (a) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) of the 
protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(b), 2(d) and 3]
PA R T I
The transferred territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated 16th 
day of May, 1974 and Article 3 (I) (d) (i) (ii) of the protocol dated 6th day of 
September, 2011.
PA RT I I
The transferred territory in relation to Article 2 of the agreement dated the 
16th day of May, 1974 and Article 3 (I) (b) (i) of the protocol dated 6th day of 
September, 2011.
PART III
The transferred territory in relation to Articles 1(12) and 2 of the 
agreement dated the 16th day of May, 1974 and Articles 2 (II), 3 (I) (a) (i) (ii) (vi) 
of the protocol dated the 6th day of September, 2011.
 

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
354
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 2(c)]
I. EXTRACTS FROM THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN GOVERNMENT OF 
THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S 
REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH CONCERNING THE DEMARCATION OF 
THE LAND BOUNDARY BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH AND 
RELATED MATTERS DATED THE 16TH DAY OF MAY, 1974
Article 1 (12): ENCLAVES
The Indian enclaves in Bangladesh and the Bangladesh enclaves in India 
should be exchanged expeditiously, excepting the enclaves mentioned in paragraph 
14 without claim to compensation for the additional area going to Bangladesh.
Article 2: 
The Governments of India and Bangladesh agree that territories in adverse 
possession in areas already demarcated in respect of which boundary strip maps 
are already prepared, shall be exchanged within six months of the signing of the 
boundary strip maps by the plenipotentiaries. They may sign the relevant maps 
as early as possible as and in any case not later than the 31st December, 1974. 
Early measures may be taken to print maps in respect of other areas where 
demarcation has already taken place. These should be printed by the 31st May, 
1975 and signed by the plenipotentiaries thereafter in order that the exchange of 
adversely held possessions in these areas may take place by the 31st December, 
1975. In sectors still to be demarcated, transfer of territorial jurisdiction may 
take place within six months of the signature by plenipotentiaries on the 
concerned boundary strip maps.
II.
EXTRACTS FROM THE PROTOCOL TO THE AGREEMENT 
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA AND 
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH 
CONCERNING THE DEMARCATION OF THE LAND BOUNDARY 
BETWEEN INDIA AND BANGLADESH AND RELATED MATTERS, 
DATED THE 6TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2011
Article 2:
(II) Article 1 Clause 12 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as 
follows:—

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
355
Enclaves
111 Indian Enclaves in Bangladesh and 51 Bangladesh Enclaves in India 
as per the jointly verified cadastral enclave maps and signed at the level of 
DGLR&S, Bangladesh and DLR&S, West Bengal (India) in April, 1997, shall be 
exchanged without claim to compensation for the additional areas going to 
Bangladesh. 
Article 3:
(I) Article 2 of the 1974 Agreement shall be implemented as follows:—
The Government of India and the Government of Bangladesh agree 
that the boundary shall be drawn as a fixed boundary for territories held in 
Adverse Possession as determined through joint survey and fully depicted 
in the respective adversely possessed land area Index Map (APL map) 
finalised by the Land Records and Survey Departments of both the 
countries between December, 2010 and August, 2011, which are fully 
described in clause (a) to (d) below.
The relevant strip maps shall be printed and signed by the 
Plenipotentiaries and transfer of territorial jurisdiction shall be completed 
simultaneously with the exchange of enclaves. The demarcation of the 
boundary, as depicted in the above-mentioned Index Maps, shall be as 
under:—
 (a)   West Bengal Sector 
(i)   Bousmari – Madhugari (Kushtia-Nadia) area
The boundary shall be drawn from the existing 
Boundary Pillar Nos. 154/5-S to 157/1-S to follow the 
centre of old course of river Mathabanga, as depicted 
in consolidation map of 1962, as surveyed jointly and 
agreed in June, 2011.
(ii)    Andharkota (Kushtia-Nadia) area
The boundary shall be drawn from existing 
Boundary Pillar No. 152/5-S to Boundary Pillar No. 
153/1-S to follow the edge of existing River 
Mathabanga as jointly surveyed and agreed in June, 
2011.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
356
(iii)   Pakuria (Kushtia-Nadia) area
The boundary shall be drawn from existing 
Boundary Pillar No. 151/1-S to Boundary Pillar No. 
152/2-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as 
jointly surveyed and agreed in June, 2011.
(iv)   Char Mahishkundi (Kushtia-Nadia) area
The boundary shall be drawn from existing 
Boundary Pillar No. 153/1-S to Boundary Pillar No. 
153/9-S to follow the edge of River Mathabanga as 
jointly surveyed and agreed in June, 2011.
(v) Haripal/Khutadah/Battoli/Sapameri/LNpur (Patari) 
(Naogaon-Malda) area
The boundary shall be drawn as line joining 
from existing Boundary Pillar No. 242/S/13, to 
Boundary Pillar No. 243/7-S/5 and as jointly 
surveyed and agreed in June, 2011.
(vi)   Berubari (Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri area)
The 
boundary 
in 
the 
area 
Berubari 
(Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri) 
adversely 
held 
by 
Bangladesh, and Berubari and Singhapara-Khudipara 
(Panchagarh-Jalpaiguri), adversely held by India shall 
be drawn as jointly demarcated during 1996-1998.
(b)     Meghalaya Sector
(i)   Lobachera-Nuncherra
The boundary from existing Boundary Pillar 
No. 1315/4-S to Boundary Pillar No. 1315/15-S in 
Lailong - Balichera, Boundary Pillar No. 1316/1-S to 
Boundary Pillar No. 1316/11-S in Lailong- Noonchera, 
Boundary Pillar No. 1317 to Boundary Pillar No. 
1317/13-S in Lailong- Lahiling and Boundary Pillar 
No. 1318/1-S to Boundary Pillar No. 1318/2-S in 
Lailong- Lobhachera shall be drawn to follow the edge 
of tea gardens as jointly surveyed and agreed in 
December, 2010.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
357
(ii)     Pyrdiwah/ Padua Area
The boundary shall be drawn from existing 
Boundary Pillar No. 1270/1-S as per jointly surveyed 
and mutually agreed line till Boundary Pillar No. 
1271/1-T. The Parties agree that the Indian Nationals 
from Pyrdiwah village shall be allowed to draw water 
from Piyang River near point No. 6 of the agreed 
Map.
(iii)   Lyngkhat Area
(aa) 
Lyngkhat-I/Kulumcherra and Lyngkhat-
II/ Kulumcherra
The boundary shall be drawn from 
existing Boundary Pillar No. 1264/4-S to 
Boundary Pillar No. 1265 and BP No. 1265/6-S to 
1265/9-S as per jointly surveyed and mutually 
agreed line.
(ab)
Lyngkhat-III/Sonarhat
The boundary shall be drawn from 
existing Boundary Pillar No. 1266/13-S along 
the nallah southwards till it meets another 
nallah in the east-west direction, thereafter it 
shall run along the northern edge of the nallah in 
east till it meets the existing International 
Boundary 
north 
of 
Reference 
Pillar 
Nos.1267/4-R-B and 1267/3-R-I.
(iv)   Dawki/Tamabil area
The boundary shall be drawn by a straight line 
joining existing Boundary Pillar Nos. 1275/1-S to 
Boundary Pillar Nos. 1275/7-S. The Parties agree to 
fencing on ‘zero line’ in this area.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
358
(v)  Naljuri/Sreepur Area
(aa)
Naljuri I
The boundary shall be a line from the 
existing Boundary Pillar No. 1277/2-S in 
southern direction up to three plots as 
depicted in the strip Map No. 166 till it meets 
the nallah flowing from Boundary Pillar No. 
1277/5-T, thereafter it will run along the western 
edge of the nallah in the southern direction up 
to 2 plots on the Bangladesh side, thereafter it 
shall run eastwards till it meets a line drawn in 
southern direction from Boundary Pillar No. 
1277/4-S. 
(ab) Naljuri III
The boundary shall be drawn by a 
straight line from existing Boundary Pillar No. 
1278/2-S to Boundary Pillar No. 1279/ 3-S.
(vi)   Muktapur/ Dibir Hawor Area
The Parties agree that the Indian Nationals shall 
be allowed to visit Kali Mandir and shall also be 
allowed to draw water and exercise fishing rights in 
the water body in the Muktapur / Dibir Hawor area 
from the bank of Muktapur side.
(c)
Tripura Sector
Chandannagar-Champarai Tea Garden area in 
Tripura/ Moulvi Bazar sector
The boundary shall be drawn along Sonaraichhera 
river from existing Boundary Pillar No. 1904 to Boundary 
Pillar No. 1905 as surveyed jointly and agreed in July, 2011.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
359
(d) Assam Sector
(i)  Kalabari (Boroibari) area in Assam sector 
The boundary shall be drawn from existing 
Boundary Pillar No. 1066/24-T to Boundary Pillar 
No. 1067/16-T as surveyed jointly and agreed in 
August, 2011.
(ii)   Pallathal area in Assam sector
The boundary shall be drawn from existing 
Boundary Pillar No. 1370/3-S to 1371/ 6-S to follow the 
outer edge of the tea garden and from Boundary Pillar 
No. 1372 to 1373/2-S along outer edge of the pan 
plantation.
III. LIST OF EXCHANGE OF ENCLAVES BETWEEN INDIA AND 
BANGLADESH IN PURSUANT TO ARTICLE 1 (12) OF THE AGREEMENT 
DATED 16TH MAY, 1974 AND THE PROTOCOL TO THE AGREEMENT 
DATED 6TH SEPTEMBER, 2011
A.    EXCHANGEABLE INDIAN ENCLAVES IN BANGLADESH WITH 
AREA
Sl.     
Name of Chhits 
No.
Chhit No.
Lying within 
Police station 
Bangladesh
Lying within 
Police station 
W. Bengal
Area 
in 
acres
1
2
3
4
5
6
A. Enclaves with independent chhits
1.
Garati
75
Pochagar
Haldibari
58.23
2.
Garati
76
Pochagar
Haldibari
0.79
3.
Garati
77
Pochagar
Haldibari
18
4.
Garati
78
Pochagar
Haldibari
958.66
5.
Garati
79
Pochagar
Haldibari
1.74
6.
Garati
80
Pochagar
Haldibari
73.75
7.
Bingimari Part-I
73
Pochagar
Haldibari
6.07

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
360
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
       6 
8. 
Nazirganja 
41
Boda
Haldibari 
58.32
9.
Nazirganja
42
Boda
Haldibari
434.29
10. 
Nazirganja 
44
Boda
Haldibari 
53.47
11.
Nazirganja
45
Boda
Haldibari
1.07
12. 
Nazirganja 
46
Boda
Haldibari 
17.95
13.
Nazirganja
47
Boda
Haldibari
3.89
14. 
Nazirganja 
48
Boda
Haldibari 
73.27
15.
Nazirganja
49
Boda
Haldibari
49.05
16.
Nazirganja
50
Boda
Haldibari
5.05
17.
Nazirganja
51
Boda
Haldibari
0.77
18.
Nazirganja
52
Boda
Haldibari
1.04
19. 
Nazirganja 
53
Boda
Haldibari 
1.02
20.
Nazirganja
54
Boda
Haldibari
3.87
21.
Nazirganja
55
Boda
Haldibari
12.18
22.
Nazirganja
56
Boda
Haldibari
54.04
23.
Nazirganja
57
Boda
Haldibari
8.27
24.
Nazirganja
58
Boda
Haldibari
14.22
25.
Nazirganja
60
Boda
Haldibari
0.52
26.
Putimari
59
Boda
Haldibari
122.8
27.
Daikhata Chhat
38
Boda
Haldibari
499.21
28.
Salbari
37
Boda
Haldibari
1188.93
29.
Kajal Dighi
36
Boda
Haldibari
771.44
30.
Nataktoka
32
Boda
Haldibari
162.26
31.
Nataktoka
33
Boda
Haldibari
0.26
32.
Beuladanga 
Chhat
35
Boda
Haldibari
0.83
33. 
Balapara 
Iagrabar
3
Debiganj
Haldibari 
1752.44
34.
Bara 
Khankikharija 
Citaldaha
30
Dimla
Haldibari
7.71

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
361
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
       6 
35. 
Bara 
Khankikharija 
Citaldaha
29
Dimla 
Haldibari 
36.83
36. 
Barakhangir 
28
Dimla 
Haldibari 
30.53
37.
Nagarjikobari
31
Dimla
Haldibari
33.41
38. 
Kuchlibari 
26
Patgram 
Mekliganj 
5.78
39.
Kuchlibari
27
Patgram
Mekliganj
2.04
40. 
Bara Kuchlibari 
Fragment 
of J.L.107 
of P.S 
Mekliganj
Patgram 
Mekliganj 
4.35
41.
Jamaldaha-
Balapukhari
6
Patgram
Mekliganj
5.24
42.
Uponchowki 
kuchlibari
115/2
Patgram
Mekliganj
0.32
43.
Uponchowki 
kuchlibari
7
Patgram
Mekliganj
44.04
44.
Bhothnri
11
Patgram
Mekliganj
36.83
45.
Balapukhari
5
Patgram
Mekliganj
55.91
46.
Bara Khangir
4
Patgram
Mekliganj
50.51
47.
Bara Khangir
9
Patgram
Mekliganj
87.42
48.
Chhat Bogdokra
10
Patgram
Mekliganj
41.7
49.
Ratanpur
11
Patgram
Mekliganj
58.91
50.
Bogdokra
12
Patgram
Mekliganj
25.49
51.
Fulker Dabri
Fragment 
of J.L. 107 
of P.S 
Mekliganj
Patgram
Mekliganj
0.88

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
362
1 
2 
3
4 
5
     6 
52.
Kharkharia
15
Patgram
Mekliganj
60.74
53. 
Kharkharia 
13
Patgram 
Mekliganj 
51.62
54.
Lotamari
14
Patgram
Mekliganj
110.92
55.
Bhotbari
16
Patgram
Mekliganj
205.46
56.
Komat 
Changrabandha
16A
Patgram
Mekliganj
42.8
57. 
Komat 
Changrabandha
17A 
Patgram 
Mekliganj 
16.01
58.
Panisala
17
Patgram
Mekliganj
137.66
59.
Dwarikamari 
Khasbash
18
Patgram
Mekliganj
36.5
60. 
Panisala 
153/P
Patgram 
Mekliganj 
0.27
61.
Panisala
153/O
Patgram
Mekliganj
18.01
62.
Panisala
19
Patgram
Mekliganj
64.63
63.
Panisala
21
Patgram
Mekliganj
51.4
64.
Lotamari
20
Patgram
Mekliganj
283.53
65.
Lotamari
22
Patgram
Mekliganj
98.85
66.
Dwarikamari
23
Patgram
Mekliganj
39.52
67.
Dwarikamari
25
Patgram
Mekliganj
45.73
68.
Chhat Bhothat
24
Patgram
Mekliganj
56.11
69.
Baakata
131
Patgram
Hathabhanga
22.35
70.
Baakata
132
Patgram
Hathabhanga
11.96
71.
Baakata
130
Patgram
Hathibhanga
20.48
72. 
Bhogramguri 
133 
Patgram 
Hathibhanga
1.44
73.
Chenakata
134
Patgram
Mekliganj
7.81
74.
Banskata
119
Patgram
Mathabanga
413.81
75.
Banskata
120
Patgram
Mathabanga
30.75
76.
Banskata
121
Patgram
Mathabanga
12.15
77.
Banskata
113
Patgram
Mathabanga
57.86
78.
Banskata
112
Patgram
Mathabanga
315.04
79.
Banskata
114
Patgram
Mathabanga
0.77

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
363
1 
2 
3
4 
5
      6 
80. 
Banskata 
115 
Patgram 
Mathabanga 
29.2
81. 
Banskata 
122 
Patgram 
Mathabanga 
33.22
82. 
Banskata 
127 
Patgram 
Mathabanga 
12.72
83.
Banskata
128
Patgram
Mathabanga
2.33
84. 
Banskata 
117 
Patgram 
Mathabanga 
2.55
85.
Banskata
118
Patgram
Mathabanga
30.98
86. 
Banskata 
125 
Patgram 
Mathabanga 
0.64
87.
Banskata
126
Patgram
Mathabanga
1.39
88. 
Banskata 
129 
Patgram 
Mathabanga 
1.37
89.
Banskata
116
Patgram
Mathabanga
16.96
90. 
Banskata 
123 
Patgram 
Mathabanga 
24.37
91.
Banskata
124
Patgram
Mathabanga
0.28
92. 
Gotamari Chhit
135 
Hatibandha
Sitalkuchi
126.59
93.
Gotamari Chhit
136
Hatibandha
Sitalkuchi
20.02
94.
Banapachai
151
Lalmonirhat
Dinhata
217.29
95.
Banapachai 
Bhitarkuthi
152
Lalmonirhat
Dinhata
81.71
96.
Dasiar Chhara
150
Fulbari
Dinhata
1643.44
97.
Dakurhat-
Dakinirkuthi 
156
Kurigram
Dinhata
14.27
98.
Kalamati
141
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
21.21
99. 
Bhahobganj 
153 
Bhurungamari
Dinhata 
31.58
100.
Baotikursa
142
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
45.63
101.
Bara Coachulka
143
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
39.99
102.
Gaochulka II
147
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
0.9
103.
Gaochulka I
146
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
8.92
104.
Dighaltari II
145
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
8.81
105.
Dighaltari I
144
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
12.31
106.
Chhoto 
Garaljhora II
149
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
17.85

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
364
1 
2 
3
4 
5
      6 
107.
Chhoto 
Garaljhora I
148
Bhurungamari
Dinhata
35.74
108.
1 chhit  without 
name & JL No. 
at the southern
and of JL No. 38 
& southern and 
of JL No. 39 
(locally known
as Ashokabari *)
Patgram
Mathabhanga
3.5
Enclaves with Fragmented Chhits
109.
(i) Bewladanga
34
Haldibari
Boda
862.46
(ii) Bewladanga
Fragment
Haldibari
Debiganj
110.
(i) Kotbhajni
2
Haldibari
Debiganj
2012.27
(ii) Kotbhajni
Fragment
Haldibari
Debiganj
(iii) Kotbhajni
Fragment
Haldibari
Debiganj
(iv) Kotbhajni
Fragment
Haldibari
Debiganj
111.
(i) Dahala
Khagrabri
Haldibari
Debiganj
2650.35
(ii) Dahala
Fragment
Haldibari
Debiganj
(iii) Dahala
Fragment
Haldibari
Debiganj
(iv) Dahala
Fragment
Haldibari
Debiganj
______________________________________________
Corrected vide 150th (54th) India-Bangladesh Boundary Conference held at Kolkata 
from 29th September to 2nd October, 2002.
* Corrected vide 152nd (56th) India-Bangladesh Boundary Conference held at 
Kochbihar, India from 18th—20th September, 2003.

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
365
1 
2 
3
4 
5
    6 
 
(v) Dahala 
Fragment
Haldibari 
Debiganj
 
 
(vi) Dahala 
Fragment
Haldibari 
Debiganj
17160.63
The above given details of enclaves have been jointly compared and 
reconciled with records held by India and Bangladesh during the Indo-
Bangladesh Conference held at Calcutta during 9th—12th October, 1996 as well as 
during joint field inspection at Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) Panchagarh (Bangladesh) 
sector during 21—24 November, 1996.
Note: Name of enclave in Sl. No. 108 above has been identified as 
Ashokabari by joint ground verification during field season 1996-97.
Brig. J.R. Peter
Director Land Records & Survey 
(Ex-Officio) West Bengal, India & 
Director, Eastern Circle Survey of 
India, Calcutta.
Md. Shafi Uddin
Director-General, Land Records
and Surveys, Bangladesh.
B. EXCHANGEABLE BANGLADESH ENCLAVES IN INDIA WITH AREA
Sl. 
No.
Name of Chhits 
Lying within 
Police station 
W. Bengal
Lying within 
Police station 
Bangladesh
J.L. 
No.
Area 
in 
acres
1 
2 
3
4
5
   6 
A. Enclaves with independent chhits
1.
Chhit Kuchlibari
Mekliganj
Patgram
22
370.64
2. 
Chhit Land of 
Kuchlibari
Mekliganj
Patgram
24 
1.83
3.
Balapukhari
Mekliganj
Patgram
21
331.64
4.
Chhit Land of Panbari 
No. 2
Mekliganj
Patgram
20
1.13

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
366
1 
2 
3
4 
5 
     6 
5. 
Chhit Panbari 
Mekliganj
Patgram 
18 
108.59
6. 
Dhabalsati Mirgipur 
Mekliganj
Patgram 
15 
173.88
7.
Bamandal
Mekliganj
Patgram
11
2.24
8.
Chhit Dhabalsati
Mekliganj
Patgram
14
66.58
9. 
Dhabalsati 
Mekliganj
Patgram 
13 
60.45
10.
Srirampur
Mekliganj
Patgram
8
1.05
11. 
Jote Nijjama 
Mekliganj
Patgram 
3 
87.54
12.
Chhit Land of 
Jagatber No. 3
Mathabhanga
Patgram
37
69.84
13. 
Chhit Land of 
Jagatber No.1
Mathabhanga
Patgram 
35 
30.66
14. 
Chhit Land of 
Jagatber No. 2
Mathabhanga
Patgram 
36 
27.09
15.
Chhit Kokoabari
Mathabhanga
Patgram
47
29.49
16.
Chhit Bhandardaha
Mathabhanga
Patgram
67
39.96
17.
Dhabalguri
Mathabhanga
Patgram
52
12.5
18.
Chhit Dhabalguri
Mathabhanga
Patgram
53
22.31
19.
Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri No. 3
Mathabhanga
Patgram
70
1.33
20.
Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri No. 4
Mathabhanga
Patgram
71
4.55
21. 
Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri No. 5
Mathabhanga
Patgram 
72 
4.12
22.
Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri No. 1
Mathabhanga
Patgram
68
26.83
23.
Chhit Land of 
Dhabalguri No. 2
Mathabhanga
Patgram
69
13.95
24.
Mahishmari
Sitalkuchi
Patgram
54
122.77
25.
Bura Saradubi
Sitalkuchi
Hatibandha
13
34.96

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
367
1 
2 
3
4 
5 
     6 
26. 
Falnapur 
Sitalkuchi 
Patgram 
64 
505.56
27. 
Amjhol 
Sitalkuchi 
Hatibandha 
57 
1.25
28.
Kismat Batrigachh
Dinhata
Kaliganj
82
209.95
29. 
Durgapur 
Dinhata 
Kaliganj
83 
20.96
30.
Bansua Khamar 
Gitaldaha 
Dinhata
Lalmonirhat
1
24.54
31.
Poaturkuthi
Dinhata
Lalmonirhat
37
589.94
32.
Paschim Bakalir 
Chhara
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
38
151.98
33.
Madhya Bakalir 
Chhara
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
39
32.72
34.
Purba Bakalir 
Chhara
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
40
12.23
35.
Madhya Masaldanga
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
3
136.66
36.
Madhya Chhit 
Masaldanga
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
8
11.87
37.
Paschim Chhit 
Masaldanga
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
7
7.6
38.
Uttar Masaldanga
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
2
27.29
39.
Kachua
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
5
119.74
40.
Uttar Bansjani
Tufanganj
Bhurungamari
1
47.17
41.
Chhat Tilai
Tufanganj
Bhurungamari
17
81.56
B. Enclaves with Fragmented Chhits
42.
(i) Nalgram
Sitalkuchi
Patgarm
65
1397.34
(ii) Nalgram 
(Fragment)
Sitalkuchi
Patgarm
65
(iii) Nalgram 
(Fragment)
Sitalkuchi
Patgarm
65

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
368
1 
2 
3
4 
5
     6 
43.
(i) Chhit Nalgram
Sitalkuchi
Patgarm
66
49.5
 
(ii) Chhit Nalgram 
(Fragment)
Sitalkuchi
Patgarm 
66
 
44.
(i) Batrigachh
Dinhata
Kaliganj
81
577.37
 
(ii) Batrigachh 
(Fragment)
Dinhata 
Kaliganj
81
 
 
(iii) Batrigachh 
(Fragment)
Dinhata 
Phulbari 
9 
 
45.
(i) Karala
Dinhata
Phulbari
9
269.91
(ii) Karala (fragment)
Dinhata
Phulbari
9
(iii) Karala (fragment)
Dinhata
Phulbari
8
46.
(i) Sipprasad Mustati
Dinhata
Phulbari
8
373.2
(ii) Sipprasad Mustati 
(Fragment)
Dinhata
Phulbari
6
47.
(i) Dakshin 
Masaldanga
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
6
571.38
 
(ii) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment)
Dinhata 
Bhurungamari 
6 
 
(iii) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment)
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
6
(iv) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment)
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
6
(v) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment)
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
6
(vi) Dakshin 
Masaldanga 
(Fragment)
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
6

THE CONSTITUTION OF  INDIA
(Appendix I) 
369
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
48. 
(i) Paschim 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata 
Bhurungamari 
4
29.49
(ii) Paschim 
Masaldanga (Fragment) 
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
4
49.
(i) Purba Chhit 
Masaldanga 
Dinhata
Bhurungamari
10
35.01
 
(ii) Purba Chhit 
Masaldanga (Fragment) 
Dinhata 
Bhurungamari 
10 
 
50. 
(i) Purba Masaldanga
Dinhata 
Bhurungamari 
11 
153.89 
 
(ii) Purba Masaldanga 
(Fragment) 
Dinhata 
Bhurungamari 
11 
 
51.
(i) Uttar Dhaldanga
Tufanganj
Bhurungamari
14
24.98
(ii) Uttar Dhaldanga 
(Fragment)
Tufanganj
Bhurungamari
14
(iii) Uttar Dhaldanga 
(Fragment)
Tufanganj
Bhurungamari
14
Total Area
7,110.02
The above given details of enclaves have been jointly compared and 
reconciled with records held by India and Bangladesh during the Indo-
Bangladesh Conference held at Calcutta during 9th—12th October, 1996 as well as 
during joint field inspection at Jalpaiguri (West Bengal) – Panchagarh (Bangladesh) 
sector during 21—24 November, 1996.
Brig. J.R. Peter
Director Land Records & Survey 
(Ex officio) West Bengal, India & 
Director, Eastern Circle Survey of 
India, Calcutta.
Md. Shafi Uddin
Director General, Land Records
and Surveys, Bangladesh.

370
APPENDIX  II 
1THE CONSTITUTION (APPLICATION TO JAMMU AND KASHMIR) 
ORDER, 2019 
C.O. 272
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 370 of the 
Constitution, the President, with the concurrence of the Government of State of 
Jammu and Kashmir, is pleased to make the following Order:—
1. (1) This Order may be called the Constitution (Application to Jammu 
and Kashmir) Order, 2019. 
(2) It shall come into force at once, and shall thereupon supersede the 
Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 1954 as amended 
from time to time. 
2. All the provisions of the Constitution, as amended from time to time, 
shall apply in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir and the exceptions 
and modifications subject to which they shall so apply shall be as follows:–
To article 367, there shall be added the following clause, namely:
“(4) For the purposes of this Constitution as it applies in relation 
to the State of Jammu and Kashmir–
(a) references to this Constitution or to the 
provisions thereof shall be construed as references to the 
Constitution or the provisions thereof as applied in relation
to the said State; 
(b) references to the person for the time being 
recognized by the President on the recommendation of the 
Legislative Assembly of the State as the Sadar-i-Riyasat of 
Jammu and Kashmir, acting on the advice of the Council of 
Ministers of the State for the time being in office, shall be 
construed as references to the Governor of Jammu and 
Kashmir;  
(c) references to the Government of the said State 
shall be construed as including references to the Governor 
of Jammu and Kashmir acting on the advice of his Council 
of Ministers; and 
(d) in proviso to clause (3) of article 370 of this 
Constitution, the expression “Constituent Assembly of the 
State referred to in clause (2)” shall read “Legislative 
Assembly of the State”.”
______________________________________________
1.Published with the Ministry of Law and Justice, (Legislative Department) notification 
No. G.S.R. 551 (E), dated the 5th August, 2019, Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i).

371
APPENDIX III
1DECLRATION UNDER ARTICLE 370(3) OF THE CONSTITUTION
C.O. 273
In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of article 370  read 
with clause (1) of article 370 of the Constitution of India, the President, on the 
recommendation of Parliament, is pleased to declare that, as from the 6th
August, 2019, all clauses of the said article 370 shall cease to be operative 
except  the following which shall read as under, namely:— 
“370. All provisions of this Constitution, as amended from time to 
time, without any modifications or exceptions, shall apply to the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir notwithstanding anything contrary contained in 
article 152 or article 308 or any other article of this Constitution or any 
other provision of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir or any law, 
document, judgement, ordinance, order, by-law, rule, regulation, 
notification, custom or usage having the force of law in the territory of 
India, or any other instrument, treaty or agreement as envisaged under 
article 363 or otherwise.”.
______________________________________________
1.Published with the Ministry of Law and Justice, (Legislative Department) notification 
No. G.S.R. 562(E), dated the 6th August, 2019, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
Section 3, Sub-section (i).

1 
 
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________ 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
PREAMBLE 
SECTIONS 
1. 
Title and extent of operation of the Code. 
2. 
Punishment of offences committed within India. 
3. 
Punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by law may be tried within, India. 
4. 
Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences. 
5. 
Certain laws not to be affected by this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS 
6. 
Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to exceptions. 
7. 
Sense of expression once explained. 
8. 
Gender. 
9. 
Number. 
10. “Man”. “Woman”. 
11. “Person”. 
12.  “Public”. 
13. [Omitted.]. 
14. “Servant of Government”. 
15. [Repealed.]. 
16. [Repealed.]. 
17. “Government”. 
18. “India”. 
19. “Judge”. 
20. “Court of Justice”. 
21. “Public servant”. 
22. “Moveable property”. 
23. “Wrongful gain”. 
“Wrongful loss”. 
Gaining wrongfully/ Losing wrongfully. 
24.  “Dishonestly”. 
25. “Fraudulently”. 
26. “Reason to believe”. 
27. Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant. 
28. “Counterfeit”. 
29. “Document”. 
29A. “Electronic record”. 
30. “Valuable security”. 
31. “A will”. 
32. Words referring to acts include illegal omissions. 
33. “Act”. 
“Omission”. 
34. Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention. 
35. When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with a criminal knowledge or intention. 
36. Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission. 
37. Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence. 
 
 

2 
 
SECTIONS 
 
38. Persons concerned in criminal act may be guilty of different offences. 
39. “Voluntarily”. 
40. “Offence”. 
41. “Special law”. 
42. “Local law”. 
43. “Illegal”. 
“Legally bound to do”. 
44. “Injury”. 
45. “Life”. 
46. “Death”. 
47. “Animal”. 
48. “Vessel”. 
49. “Year”. 
“Month”. 
50. “Section”. 
51. “Oath”. 
52. “Good faith
”. 
52A. “Harbour
-“. 
 
CHAPTER III 
OF PUNISHMENTS 
53. Punishments. 
53A. Construction of reference to transportation. 
54. Commutation of sentence of death. 
55. Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life. 
55A. Definition of "appropriate Government". 
56. [Repealed.]. 
57. Fractions of terms of punishment. 
58. [Repealed.]. 
59. [Repealed.]. 
60. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous of simple. 
61. [Repealed.]. 
62. [Repealed.]. 
63. Amount of fine. 
64. Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine. 
65. Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when imprisonment and fine awardable. 
66. Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine. 
67. Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable with fine only. 
68. Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine. 
69. Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part of fine. 
70. Fine leviable within six years, of during imprisonment. Death not to discharge property from liability. 
71. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences. 
72. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the judgment stating that is doubtful of which.  
73. Solitary confinement. 
74. Limit of solitary confinement. 
75. Enhanced punishment for certain offences under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII after previous 
conviction. 
CHAPTER IV 
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 
76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law. 
77. Act of Judge when acting judicially. 
78. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court. 
79. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself justified, by law. 
80. Accident in doing a lawful act. 
81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm. 
 
 

3 
 
SECTIONS 
 
82. Act of a child under seven years of age. 
83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature understanding. 
84. Act of a person of unsound mind. 
85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will. 
86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicated. 
87. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by consent. 
88. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person's benefit. 
89. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person, by or by consent of guardian.  
Provisos. 
90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception. 
Consent of insane person. 
Consent of child. 
91. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm caused. 
92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent. 
Provisos. 
93. Communication made in good faith. 
94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats. 
95. Act causing slight harm. 
Of the Right of Private Defense 
96. Things done in private defence. 
97. Right of private defence of the body and of property. 
98. Right of private defence against the act of a person of unsound mind. etc. 
99. Acts against which there is no right of private defence. 
Extent to which the right may be exercised. 
100. When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing death. 
101. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death. 
102. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of the body. 
103. When the right of private defence of property extends to causing death. 
104. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death. 
105. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of property.  
106. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent person. 
 
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT 
107. Abetment of a thing. 
108. Abettor. 
108A. Abetment in Indian of offences outside India. 
109. Punishment of a abetment if the act abetted is committed in consequence and when no express 
provision is made for its punishment. 
110. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intention from that of abettor.  
111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done. 
112. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done. 
113. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted different from that intended by the abettor. 
114. Abettor present when offence is committed. 
115. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.—if offence not committed. 
if act causing harm be done in consequence. 
116. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment.—if offence be not committed. 
if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is to prevent offence. 
117. Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten persons. 
118. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life. 
If offence be committed; 
if offence be not committed. 
119. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty to prevent. 
if offence be committed; 
if offence be punishable with death, etc. 
if offence be not committed. 
120. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment. 
if offence be committed; 
if offence be not committed. 

4 
 
CHAPTER VA 
CRIMINALCONSPIRACY 
SECTIONS 
120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy. 
120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy. 
 
CHAPTER VI 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE STATE 
121. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against the Government of India. 
121A. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 121. 
122. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the Government of India. 
123. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war. 
124. Assaulting President. Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain the exercise of any lawful power. 
124A. Sedition. 
125. Waging war against any Asiatic power in alliance with the Government of India. 
126. Committing depredation on territories of power at peace with the Government of India. 
127. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections 125 and 126. 
128. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of State or war to escape. 
129. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape. 
130. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner. 
CHAPTER VII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO THE ARMY, NAVYAND AIR FORCE 
131. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from his duty. 
132. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof. 
133. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior officer, when in execution of his office. 
134. Abetment of such assault, if the assault is committed. 
135. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman. 
136. Harbouring deserter. 
137. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of master. 
138. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman. 
138A. [Repealed.]. 
139. Persons subject to certain Acts. 
140. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman. 
CHAPTER VIII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY 
141. Unlawful assembly. 
142. Being member of unlawful assembly. 
143. Punishment. 
144. Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon. 
145. Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been commanded to disperse. 
146. Rioting. 
147. Punishment for rioting. 
148. Rioting, armed with deadly weapon. 
149. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common object. 
150. Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful assembly. 
151. Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more persons after it has been commanded to disperse. 
152. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc. 
153. Wantonly giving provocation, with intent to cause riot— 
if rioting be committed; if not committed. 
153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence. 
language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony. 
Offence committed in place of worship, etc. 
153AA. Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession or organizing, or holding or taking part in 
any mass drill or mass training with arms. 
153B. Imputation, assertions prejudicial to national-integration. 
154. Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held. 
155. Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed. 
156. Liablility of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit riot is committed. 
157. Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly. 
 
 

5 
 
SECTIONS 
158. Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot; or to go armed. 
159. Affray. 
160. Punishment for committing affray. 
CHAPTER IX 
OF OFFENCESBY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS 
161. [Repealed.]. 
162. [Repealed.]. 
163. [Repealed.]. 
164. [Repealed.]. 
165. [Repealed.]. 
165A. [Repealed.]. 
166. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person. 
166A. Public servant disobeying direction under law. 
166B. Punishment for non-treatment of victim. 
167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury. 
168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade. 
169. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property. 
170. Personating a public servant. 
171. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent intent. 
CHAPTER IXA 
OF OFFENCESRELATING TO ELECTIONS 
171A. “Candidate”, “Electoral right” defined. 
171B. Bribery. 
171C. Undue influence at elections. 
171D.Personation at elections. 
171E. Punishment for bribery. 
171F. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election. 
171G.False statement in connection with an election. 
171H. Illegal payments in connection with an election. 
171-I. Failure to keep election accounts. 
 
CHAPTER X 
OF CONTEMPTS OF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITY OF PUBLIC SERVANTS 
172. Absconding to avoid service of summons of other proceeding. 
173. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing publication thereof. 
174. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant. 
174A. Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under section 82 of Act 2 of 1974. 
175. Omission to produce document to public servant by person legally bound to produce it. 
176. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person legally bound to give it. 
177. Furnishing false information. 
178. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it. 
179. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question. 
180. Refusing to sign statement. 
181. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person authorised to administer an oath or 
affirmation. 
182. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to the injury of another person. 
183. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a public servant. 
184. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public servant. 
185. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of public servant. 
186. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions. 
187. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give assistance. 
188. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant. 
189. Threat of injury to public servant. 
190. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection to public servant. 
CHAPTER XI 
OF FLSEEVIDENCE AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE 
191. Giving false evidence. 
 
 

6 
 
SECTIONS 
192. Fabricating false evidence. 
193. Punishment for false evidence. 
194. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of capital offence. 
if innocent person be thereby convicted and executed. 
195. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of offence punishable with imprisonment for life 
or imprisonment. 
195A. Threatening any person to give false evidence. 
196. Using evidence known to be false. 
197. Issuing or signing false certificate. 
198. Using as true a certificate known to be false. 
199. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence. 
200. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false. 
201. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information, to screen offender— 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life; 
if punishable with less than ten Years' imprisonment. 
202. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform. 
203. Giving false information respecting an offence committed. 
204. Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence. 
205. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution. 
206. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution. 
207. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution. 
208. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due. 
209. Dishonestly making false claim in Court. 
210. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due. 
211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure. 
212. Harbouring offender.—  
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
213. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment.— 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
214. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening offender- 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
215. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc. 
216. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody of whose apprehension has been ordered- 
if a capital offence; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment. 
216A. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits. 
216B. [Repealed.] 
217. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from punishment or property from forfeiture. 
218. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person from punishment or property from 
forfeiture. 
219. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law. 
220. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who knows that he is acting contrary to law. 
221. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to apprehend. 
222. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to apprehend person under sentence or lawfully 
committed. 
223. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public servant. 
224. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension. 
225. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person. 
225A. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases not otherwise, provided for. 
225B. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape or rescue in cases not otherwise provided for. 
226. [Repealed.] 
227. Violation of condition of remission of punishment. 
228. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding. 
228A. Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain offences, etc. 
229. Personation of a juror or assessor. 
229A. Failure by person released on bail or bond to appear in Court. 
 
 
 

7 
 
CHAPTER XII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO COIN AND GOVERNMENT STAMPS 
SECTIONS 
230. “Coin” defined. 
Indian coin. 
231. Counterfeiting coin. 
232. Counterfeiting Indian coin. 
233. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting coin. 
234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian coin. 
235. Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of using the same for counterfeiting coin:  
if Indian coin. 
236. Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin. 
237. Import or export of counterfeit coin. 
238. Import or export of counterfeits of the Indian coin. 
239. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit. 
240. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit. 
241. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the deliverer did not know to be counterfeit. 
242. Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit when he became possessed thereof. 
243. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit when he became possessed thereof. 
244. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or composition from that fixed by law. 
245. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint. 
246. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition of coin. 
247. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition of Indian coin. 
248. Altering appearance of coin with intent that it shall pass as coin of different description. 
249. Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall pass as coin of different description. 
250. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered. 
251. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered. 
252. Possession of coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became possessed thereof. 
253. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became possessed thereof. 
254. Delivery of coin as genuine which, when first possessed, the deliverer did not know to be altered. 
255. Counterfeiting Government stamp. 
256. Having possession of instrument or material for counterfeiting Government stamp. 
257. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp. 
258. Sale of counterfeit Government stamp. 
259. Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp. 
260. Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be counterfeit. 
261. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing from document a stamp used for it, 
with intent to cause loss to Government. 
262. Using Government stamp known to have been before used. 
263. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used. 
263A. Prohibition of fictitious stamps. 
CHAPTER XIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO WEIGHTS AND MEASURES 
264. Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing. 
265. Fraudulent use of false weight or measure. 
266. Being In possession of false weight or measure. 
267. Making or selling false weight or measure. 
CHAPTER XIV 
OF OFFENCES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, 
DECENCYAND MORALS 
268. Public nuisance. 
269. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life. 
270. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life. 
271. Disobedience to quarantine rule. 
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale. 
273. Sale of noxious food or drink. 
274. Adulteration of drugs. 
 
 

8 
 
SECTIONS 
275. Sale of adulterated drugs. 
276. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation. 
277. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir. 
278. Making atmosphere noxious to health. 
279. Rash driving or riding on a public way. 
280. Rash navigation of vessel. 
281. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy. 
282. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel. 
283. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation. 
284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance. 
285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter. 
286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance. 
287. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery. 
288. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing buildings. 
289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal. 
290. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for. 
291. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue. 
292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc. 
293. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person. 
294. Obscene acts and songs. 
294A. Keeping lottery office. 
CHAPTER XV 
OF OFFENCESRELATING TO RELIGION 
295. Injuring or defiling place of work ship, with intent to insult the religion of any class. 
295A. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by insulting its 
religion or religious beliefs. 
296. Disturbing religious assembly. 
297. Trespassing on burial places, etc. 
298. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound the religious feelings. 
CHAPTER XVI 
OF OFFENCESAFFECTINGTHE HUMAN BODY 
 
Of offences affecting life 
299. Culpable homicide. 
300. Murder. 
When culpable homicide is not murder. 
301. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose death was intended. 
302. Punishment for murder. 
303. Punishment for murder by life-convict. 
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder. 
304A. Causing death by negligence. 
304B. Dowry death. 
305. Abetment of suicide of child or insane person. 
306. Abetment of suicide. 
307. Attempt to murder. 
Attempts by life-convicts. 
308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide. 
309. Attempt to commit suicide. 
310. Thug. 
311. Punishment. 
Of the causing of Miscarriage, of Injuries to unborn Children, of the Exposure of Infants,  
and of the concealment of Births 
312. Causing miscarriage. 
313. Causing miscarriage without woman's consent. 
314. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage. 
if act done without woman's consent. 
315. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it to die after birth. 
316. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide. 
 
 

9 
 
SECTIONS 
317. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by parent or person having care of it. 
318. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body. 
Of Hurt 
319. Hurt. 
320. Grievous hurt. 
321. Voluntarily causing hurt. 
322. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt. 
323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt. 
324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means. 
325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt. 
326. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means. 
326A. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc. 
326B. Voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw acid. 
327. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act. 
328. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit an offence. 
329. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act. 
330. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of property. 
331. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of property. 
332. Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty. 
333. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty. 
334. Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation. 
335. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation. 
336. Act endangering life or personal safety of others. 
337. Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others. 
338. Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others. 
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement 
339. Wrongful restraint. 
340. Wrongful confinement. 
341. Punishment for wrongful restraint. 
342. Punishment for wrongful confinement. 
343. Wrongful confinement for three or more days. 
344. Wrongful confinement for ten or more days. 
345. Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has been issued. 
346. Wrongful confinement in secret. 
347. Wrongful confinement to extort property, or constrain to illegal act. 
348. Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel restoration of property. 
Of Criminal Force and Assault 
349. Force. 
350. Criminal force. 
351. Assault. 
352. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation. 
353. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty. 
354. Assault of criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty. 
354A. Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment. 
354B. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe. 
354C. Voyeurism. 
354D. Stalking. 
355. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise than on grave provocation. 
356. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property carried by a person. 
357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a person. 
358. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation. 
Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour 
359. Kidnapping. 
360. Kidnapping from India. 
361. Kidnapping from lawful guardianship. 
362. Abduction. 
363. Punishment for kidnapping. 
363A. Kidnapping or maiming a minor for purposes of begging. 
364. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder. 

10 
 
SECTIONS 
364A. Kidnapping for ransom, etc. 
365. Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine person. 
366. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc. 
366A. Procuration of minor girl. 
366B. Importation of girl from foreign country. 
367. Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to grievous hurt, slavery, etc. 
368. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted person. 
369. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to steal from its person. 
370. Trafficking of person. 
370A. Exploitation of a trafficked person. 
371. Habitual dealing in slaves. 
372. Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc. 
373. Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc. 
374. Unlawful compulsory labour. 
Sexual offences 
375. Rape. 
376. Punishment for rape. 
376A. Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim. 
376B. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation. 
376C. Sexual intercourse by a person in authority. 
376D. Gang rape. 
        376DA.Punishment for gang rape on woman under sixteen years of age. 
       376DB.Punishment for gang rape on woman under twelve years of age. 
376E. Punishment for repeat offenders. 
Of Unnatural offences 
377. Unnatural offences. 
CHAPTER XVII 
OF OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY 
Of Theft 
378. Theft. 
379. Punishment for theft. 
380. Theft in dwelling house, etc. 
381. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master. 
382. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to the committing of the theft. 
Of Extortion 
383. Extortion. 
384. Punishment for extortion. 
385. Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion. 
386. Extortion by putting a person in fear of death on grievous hurt. 
387. Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in order to commit extortion. 
388. Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, etc. 
389. Putting person in fear of accusation of offence, in order to commit extortion. 
Of Robbery and Dacoity 
390. Robbery. 
When theft is robbery. 
When extortion is robbery. 
391. Dacoity. 
392. Punishment for robbery. 
393. Attempt to commit robbery. 
394. Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery. 
395. Punishment for dacoity. 
396. Dacoity with murder. 
397. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt. 
398. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon. 
399. Making preparation to commit dacoity. 
400. Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits. 
401. Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves. 
402. Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity. 
 
 

11 
 
Of Criminal Misappropriation of Property 
SECTIONS 
403. Dishonest misappropriation of property. 
404. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his death. 
Of Criminal Breach of Trust 
405. Criminal breach of trust. 
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust. 
407. Criminal breach of trust by carrier, etc. 
408. Criminal breach of trust by clerk or servant. 
409. Criminal breach of trust by public, servant. or by banker, merchant or agent. 
Of the Receiving of Stolen Property 
410. Stolen property. 
411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property. 
412. Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a dacoity. 
413. Habitually dealing in stolen property. 
414. Assisting in concealment of stolen property. 
Of Cheating 
415. Cheating. 
416. Cheating by personation. 
417. Punishment for cheating. 
418. Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person whose interest offender is bound to protect. 
419. Punishment for cheating by personation. 
420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property. 
Of Fraudulent Deeds and Dispositions of Property 
421. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among creditor. 
422. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors. 
423. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement of consideration. 
424. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property. 
Of Mischief 
425. Mischief. 
426. Punishment for mischief. 
427. Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees. 
428. Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten rupees. 
429. Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or any animal of the value of fifty rupees. 
430. Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully diverting water. 
431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel. 
432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public drainage attended with damage. 
433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a light-house or sea-mark. 
434. Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by public authority. 
435. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause damage to amount of one hundred or (in case of agricultural 
produce ) ten rupees. 
436. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy house, etc. 
437. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked vessel or one of twenty tons burden. 
438. Punishment for the mischief described in section 437 committed by fire or explosive substance. 
439. Punishment for intentionally running vessel agroun, or ashore with intent to commit theft, etc. 
440. Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death or hurt. 
Of Criminal Trespass 
441. Criminal trespass. 
442. House-trespass. 
443. Lurking house-trespass. 
444. Lurking house-trespass by night. 
445. House-breaking. 
446. House-breaking by night. 
447. Punishment for criminal trespass. 
448. Punishment for house-trespass. 
449. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with death. 
450. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment for life. 
451. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment. 

12 
 
SECTIONS 
 
452. House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint. 
453. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking. 
454. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment. 
455. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint. 
456. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night. 
457. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment. 
458. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after preparation for hurt, assault, or wrongful restraint. 
459. Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking. 
460. All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night punishable where death or grievous 
hurt caused by one of them. 
461. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property. 
462. Punishment for same offence when committed by person entrusted with custody. 
 
CHAPTER XVIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTS AND TO PROPERTY MARKS 
463. Forgery. 
464. Making a false document. 
465. Punishment for forgery. 
466. Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc. 
467. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. 
468. Forgery for purpose of cheating. 
469. Forgery for purpose of harming reputation. 
470. Forged document. 
471. Using as genuine a forged document or electronic record. 
472. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery punishable under section 467. 
473. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery punishable otherwise. 
474. Having possession of document described in section 466 or 467, knowing it to be forged and intending to use it as 
genuine. 
475. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit 
marked material. 
476. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents other than those described in section 467, or 
possessing counterfeit marked material. 
477. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable security. 
477A. Falsification of accounts. 
Of Property and Other Marks 
478. [Repealed.] 
479. Property mark. 
480. [Repealed.] 
481. Using a false property mark. 
482. Punishment for using a false property mark. 
483. Counterfeiting a property mark used by another. 
484. Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant. 
485. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark. 
486. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark. 
487. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods. 
488. Punishment for making use of any such false mark. 
489. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury. 
Of Currency-Notes and Bank-Notes 
489A.Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes. 
489B. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes. 
489C. Possession of forged or counterfeit currency notes or bank-notes. 
489D. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes. 
489E. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes. 
CHAPTER XIX 
OF THE CRIMINAL BREACH OF CONTRACTS OF SERVICE 
490. [Repealed.]. 
491. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person. 
492. [Repealed.]. 

13 
 
CHAPTER XX 
OF OFFENCES RELATINGTO MARRIAGE 
SECTIONS 
493. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage. 
494. Marrying again during life-time of husband or wife. 
495. Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person with whom subsequent marriage is contracted. 
496. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage. 
497. Adultery. 
498. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman. 
 
CHAPTER XXA 
OF CRUELTY BY HUSBAND OR RELATIVES OF HUSBAND 
498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty. 
CHAPTER XXI 
OF DEFAMATION 
499. Defamation. 
Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published. 
Public conduct of public servants. 
Conduct of any person touching any public question. 
Publication of reports of proceedings of Courts. 
Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and others concerned. 
Merits of public performance. 
Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful authority over another. 
Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person. 
Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's interests. 
Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for public good. 
500. Punishment for defamation. 
501. Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory. 
502. Sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter. 
 
CHAPTER XXII 
OR CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULTAND ANNOYANCE 
503. Criminal intimidation. 
504. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace. 
505. Statements conducing to public mischief. 
Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between classes. 
Offence under sub-section (2) committed in place of worship, etc. 
506. Punishment for criminal intimidation. 
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc. 
507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication. 
508. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of the Divine displeasure. 
509. Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman. 
510. Misconduct in public by a drunken person. 
CHAPTER XXIII 
OF ATTEMPTS OF COMMIT OFFENCES 
511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment for life or other 
imprisonment. 
 
 
 

14 
 
THE INDIAN PENAL CODE 
ACT NO. 45 OF 18601 
[6th October, 1860.] 
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION 
Preamble.—WHEREAS it is expedient to provide a general Penal Code for 2[India]; It is 
enacted as follows:— 
1. Title and extent of operation of the Code.—This Act shall be called the Indian Penal Code, and 
shall 3[extend to the whole of India 4[except the State of Jammu and Kashmir]]. 
2. Punishment of offences committed within India.—Every person shall be liable to punishment 
under this Code and not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which 
he shall be guilty within 5[India] 6****.  
3. Punishment of offences committed beyond, but which by law may be tried within, India.—
Any person liable, by any 7[Indian law], to be tried for an offence committed beyond 8[India] shall be 
dealt with according to the provisions of this Code for any act committed beyond 8[India] in the same 
manner as if such act had been committed within 5[India]. 
9[4. Extension of Code to extra-territorial offences.—The provisions of this Code apply also to any 
offence committed by— 
10[(1) any citizen of India in any place without and beyond India; 
(2) any person on any ship or aircraft registered in India wherever it may be.] 
11[(3) any person in any place without and beyond India committing offence targeting a computer 
resource located in India.] 
12[Explanation.—In this section— 
(a) the word “offence” includes every act committed outside India which, if committed in 
India, would be punishable under this Code; 
 
 
                                                          
1. The Indian Penal Code has been extended to Berar by the Berar Laws Act, 1941 (4 of 1941) and has been declared in force 
in— 
Sonthal Parganas, by the Sonthal Parganas Settlement Regulation 1872 (3 of 1872) s. 2; 
Panth Piploda, by the Panth Piploda Laws Regulation, 1929 (1 of 1929), s. 2 and the Sch.; 
Khondmals District, by the Khondmals Laws Regulation, 1936 (4 of 1936), s. 3 and the Sch; and 
Angul District, by the Angul Laws Regulation, 1936 (5 of 1936), s. 3 and the Sch. 
It has been declared under s. 3 (a) of the Scheduled Districts Act, 1874 (14 of 1874), to be in force in the following 
Scheduled Districts, namely: the United Provinces Tarai Districts, see Gazette of India, 1876, Pt. I, p. 505; the Districts of 
Hazaribagh, Lohardaga [now called the Ranchi District, see Calcutta Gazetta, 1899, Pt. I, p. 44] and Manbhum and  
Pargana Dhalbhum and the Kolhan in the District of Singhbum—see Gazette of India, 1881, Pt. I, p. 504. 
It has been extended under s. 5 of the same Act to the Lushai Hills—see Gazette of India, 1898, Pt. II, p. 345. 
The Act has been extended to Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 12 of 1962, s. 3 and Sch; to Dadra and Nagar Haveli by Reg. 6 
of 1963, s. 2 and Sch. I.; to Pondicherry by Reg. 7 of 1963, s. 3 and Sch. I and to Lakshadweep by Reg. 8 of 1965, s. 3 and Sch. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A.O. 1948, the A.O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
3. The Original words have successively been amended by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and Sch. I, the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948 and the 
A.O. 1950 to read as above. 
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “except Part B States”. 
5. The original words “the said territories” have successively been amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948, the A.O 1950 and 
Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., to read as above. 
6. The words and figures “on or after the said first day of May, 1861” rep. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Sch. 
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “law passed by the Governor General of India in Council”. 
8. The Original words “the limits of the said territories” have successively been amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O.1948,  
the A.O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., to read as above. 
9. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 2, for section 4. 
10. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for cls. (1) to (4). 
11. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
12. Subs. by s. 51, ibid., for the Explanation (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

15 
 
(b) the expression “computer resource” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (k) of 
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);] 
1[Illustration] 
2***A, 3[who is 4[a citizen of India]], commits a murder in Uganda. He can be tried and convicted of 
of murder in any place in 5[India] in which he may be found. 
6*  
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
 
 * 
 
 *  
7[5. Certain laws not to be affected by this Act.—Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of 
any Act for punishing mutiny and desertion of officers, soldiers, sailors or airmen in the service of the 
Government of India or the provisions of any special or local law.] 
CHAPTER II 
GENERAL EXPLANATIONS 
6. Definitions in the Code to be understood subject to exceptions.—Throughout this Code every 
definition of an offence, every penal provision, and every illustration of every such definition or penal 
provision, shall be understood subject to the exceptions contained in the Chapter entitled “General 
Exceptions”, though those exceptions are not repeated in such definition, penal provision, or illustration. 
Illustrations 
(a) The sections, in this Code, which contain definitions of offences, do not express that a child under seven years of age 
cannot commit such offences; but the definitions are to be understood subject to the general exception which provides that 
nothing shall be an offence which is done by a child under seven years of age. 
(b) A, a police-officer, without warrant, apprehends Z, who has committed murder. Here A is not guilty of the offence of 
wrongful confinement; for he was bound by law to apprehend Z, and therefore the case falls within the general exception which 
provides that “nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is bound by law to do it”. 
7. Sense of expression once explained.—Every expression which is explained in any part of this 
Code, is used in every part of this Code in conformity with the explanation. 
8. Gender.—The pronoun “he” and its derivatives are used of any person, whether male or female. 
9. Number.—Unless the contrary appears from the context, words importing the singular number 
include the plural number, and words importing the plural number include the singular number. 
10. “Man”. “Woman”.—The word “man” denotes a male human being of any age; the word 
“woman” denotes a female human being of any age. 
11. “Person”.—The word “person” includes any Company or Association or body of persons, 
whether incorporated or not. 
12. “Public”.—The word “public” includes any class of the public or any community. 
13. [Definition of “Queen”.] Omitted by the A. O. 1950. 
8[14. “Servant of Government”.—The words “servant of Government” denote any officer or servant 
servant continued, appointed or employed in India by or under the authority of Government.] 
15. [Definition of “British India”.] Rep. by the A. O. 1937. 
16. [Definition of “Government of India”.] Rep., ibid. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and Schedule II, for “lllustrations” 
2. The brackets and letter “(a)” omitted by s. 3 and the Second Sch., ibid. 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “a coolie, who is a Native Indian subject” 
4. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “a British subject of Indian domicile”. 
5. The words “British India” have been successively amended by the A.O. 1948, the A.O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  
the Sch., to read as above. 
6. Illustrations (b), (c) and (d) omitted by the A.O. 1950. 
7. Subs., ibid., for section 5. 
8. Subs., ibid., for section 14. 

16 
 
1[17 “Government”.—The word “Government” denotes the Central Government or the Government 
of a 2***State.] 
3[18. “India”.—“India” means the territory of India excluding the State of Jammu and Kashmir.] 
19. “Judge”.—The word “Judge” denotes not only every person who is officially designated as a 
Judge, but also every person. 
who is empowered by law to give, in any legal proceeding, civil or criminal, a definitive judgment, or 
a judgment which, if not appealed against, would be definitive, or a judgment which, if confirmed by 
some other authority, would be definitive, or 
who is one of a body or persons, which body of persons is empowered by law to give such a 
judgment. 
Illustrations 
(a) A Collector exercising jurisdiction in a suit under Act 10 of 1859, is a Judge. 
(b) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has power to sentence to fine or imprisonment, 
with or without appear, is a Judge. 
(c) A member of a panchayat which has power, under 4Regulation VII, 1816, of the Madras Code, to try and determine suits, 
suits, is a Judge. 
(d) A Magistrate exercising jurisdiction in respect of a charge on which he has power only to commit for trial to another 
Court, is not a Judge. 
20. “Court of Justice”.—The words “Court of Jutsice” denote a Judge who is empowered by law to 
act judicially alone, or a body of Judges which is empowered by law to act judicially as a body, when 
such Judge or body of Judges is acting judicially. 
Illustration 
A Panchayat acting under 4Regulation VII, 1816, of the Madras Code, having power to try and determine suits, is a Court of 
Justice. 
21. “Public servant”.—The words “public servant” denote a person falling under any of the 
descriptions hereinafter following, namely:— 
5*  
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
Second.—Every Commissioned Officer in the Military, 6[Naval or Air] Forces 7[8*** of India]; 
9[Third.—Every Judge including any person empowered by law to discharge, whether by himself or 
as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory functions;] 
Fourth.—Every officer of a Court of Justice 10[(including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner)] 
whose duty it is, as such officer, to investigate or report on any matter of law or fact, or to make, 
authenticate, or keep any document, or to take charge or dispose of any property, or to execute any 
judicial process, or to administer any oath, or to interpret, or to preserve order in the Court, and every 
person specially authorised by a Court of Justice to perform any of such duties; 
Fifth.—Every juryman, assessor, or member of a panchayat assisting a Court of Justice or public 
servant; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for section 17. 
2. The word and letter “Part A” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch. 
3. Subs. by s. 3 and the Sch., ibid., for s. 18 which was ins. by the A.O. 1950. The Original s. 18 was rep. by the A.O. 1937. 
4. Rep. by the Madras Civil Courts Act, 1873 (3 of 1873). 
5.Cl. First omitted by the A.O. 1950. 
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “or Naval”. 
7. The original words “of the Queen while serving under the Government of India, or any Government” have successively been 
amended by the A.O. 1937, the A.O. 1948 and the A.O. 1950 to read as above. 
8. The words “of the Dominion” omitted by the A.O. 1950. 
9. Subs. by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2, for cl. Third. 
10. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. 

17 
 
Sixth.—Every arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been referred for decision 
or report by any Court of Justice, or by any other competent public authority; 
Seventh.—Every person who holds any office by virtue of which he is empowered to place or keep 
any person in confinement; 
Eighth.—Every officer of 1[the Government] whose duty it is, as such officer, to prevent offences, to 
give information of offences, to bring offenders to justice, or to protect the public health, safety or 
convenience; 
Ninth.—Every officer whose duty it is as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property 
on behalf of 1[the Government], or to make any survey, assessment or contract on behalf of 1[the 
Government], or to execute any revenue-process, or to investigate, or to report, on any matter affecting 
the pecuniary interests of 1[the Government], or to make, authenticate or keep any document relating to 
the pecuniary interests of 1[the Government], or to prevent the infraction of any law for the protection of 
the pecuniary interests of 1[the Government] 2***; 
Tenth.—Every officer whose duty it is, as such officer, to take, receive, keep or expend any property, 
to make any survey or assessment or to levy any rate or tax for any secular common purpose of any 
village, town or district, or to make, authenticate or keep any document for the ascertaining of the rights 
of the people of any village, town or district; 
3[Eleventh.—Every person who holds any office in virtue of which he is empowered to prepare, 
publish, maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or part of an election;] 
4[Twelfth.—Every person— 
(a) in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by fees or commission for the 
performance of any public duty by the Government; 
(b) in the service or pay of a local authority, a corporation established by or under a Central, 
Provincial or State Act or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies  
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).] 
Illustration 
A Municipal Commissioner is a public servant. 
Explanation 1.—Persons falling under any of the above descriptions are public servants, whether 
appointed by the Government or not. 
Explanation 2.—Wherever the words “public servant” occur, they shall be understood of every 
person who is in actual possession of the situation of a public servant, whatever legal defect there may be 
in his right to hold that situation. 
 3[Explanation 3.—The word “election” denotes an election for the purpose of selecting members of 
any legislative, municipal or other public authority, of whatever character, the method of selection to 
which is by, or under, any law prescribed as by election.] 
5*  
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 *  
 
 
* 
22. “Movable property”.—The words “movable property” are intended to include corporeal 
property of every description, except land and things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to 
anything which is attached to the earth. 
23. “Wrongful gain”.—“Wrongful gain” is gain by unlawful means of property to which the person 
gaining is not legally entitled. 
“Wrongful loss”.—“Wrongful loss” is the loss by unlawful means of property to which the person 
losing it is legally entitled. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Crown” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “Government”. 
2. Certain words omitted by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2. 
3. Ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2. 
4. Subs. by Act 40 of 1964, s. 2, for Cl. Twelfth. 
5. Explanation 4 omitted by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2. 

18 
 
Gaining wrongfully/Losing wrongfully.—A person is said to gain wrongfully when such person 
retains wrongfully, as well as when such person acquires wrongfully. A person is said to lose wrongfully 
when such person is wrongfully kept out of any property, as well as when such person is wrongfully 
deprived of property. 
24. “Dishonestly”.—Whoever does anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one 
person or wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that thing “dishonestly”. 
25. “Fraudulently”.—A person is said to do a thing fraudulently if he does that thing with intent to 
defraud but not otherwise. 
26. “Reason to believe”.—A person is said to have “reason to believe” a thing, if he has sufficient 
cause to believe that thing but not otherwise. 
27. “Property in possession of wife, clerk or servant”.—When property is in the possession of a 
person's wife, clerk or servant, on account of that person, it is in that person's possession within the 
meaning of this Code. 
Explanation.—A person employed temporarily or on a particular occasion in the capacity of a clerk 
or servant, is a clerk or servant within the meaning of this section. 
28. “Counterfeit”.—A person is said to “counterfeit” who causes one thing to resemble another 
thing, intending by means of that resemblance to practise deception, or knowing it to be likely that 
deception will thereby be practised. 
1[Explanation 1.—It is not essential to counterfeiting that the imitation should be exact. 
Explanation 2.—When a person causes one thing to resemble another thing, and the resemblance is 
such that a person might be deceived thereby, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that the 
person so causing the one thing to resemble the other thing intended by means of that resemblance to 
practise deception or knew it to be likely that deception would thereby be practised.] 
29. “Document”.—The word “document” denotes any matter expressed or described upon any 
substance by means of letters, figures or marks, or by more than one of those means, intended to be used, 
or which may be used, as evidence of that matter. 
Explanation 1.—It is immaterial by what means or upon what substance the letters, figures or marks 
are formed, or whether the evidence is intended for, or may be used in, a Court of Justice, or not.  
Illustrations 
A writing expressing the terms of a contract, which may be used as evidence of the contract, is a document. 
A cheque upon a banker is a document. 
A power-of-attorney is a document. 
A map or plan which is intended to be used or which may be used as evidence, is a document. 
A writing containing directions or instructions is a document. 
Explanation 2.—Whatever is expressed by means of letters, figures or marks as explained by 
mercantile or other usage, shall be deemed to be expressed by such letters, figures or marks within the 
meaning of this section, although the same may not be actually expressed.  
Illustration 
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange payable to his order. The meaning of the endorsement, as explained by 
mercantile usage, is that the bill is to be paid to the holder. The endorsement is a document, and must be construed in the same 
manner as if the words “pay to the holder” or words to that effect had been written over the signature. 
2[29A. “Electronic record”.—The words “electronic record” shall have the meaning assigned to 
them in clause (t) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).] 
30. “Valuable security”.—The words “valuable security” denote a document which is, or purports to 
be, a document whereby any legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 1889, s. 9, for the Explanation. 
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch. (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 

19 
 
released, or whereby any person acknowledges that he lies under legal liability, or has not a certain legal 
right. 
Illustration 
A writes his name on the back of a bill of exchange. As the effect of this endorsement is to transfer the right to the bill to any 
person who may become the unlawful holder of it, the endorsement is a “valuable security”.  
31. “A will”.—The words “a will” denote any testamentary document. 
32. Words referring to acts include illegal omissions.—In every part of this Code, except where a 
contrary intention appears from the context, words which refer to acts done extend also to illegal 
omissions. 
33. “Act”. “Omission”.—The word “act” denotes as well as series of acts as a single act: the word 
“omission” denotes as well a series of omissions as a single omission.  
1[34. Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention.—When a criminal act is 
done by several persons in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such persons is liable for 
that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.] 
35. When such an act is criminal by reason of its being done with a criminal knowledge or 
intention.—Whenever an act, which is criminal only by reason of its being done with a criminal 
knowledge or intention, is done by several persons, each of such persons who joins in the act with such 
knowledge or intention is liable for the act in the same manner as if the act were done by him alone with 
that knowledge or intention. 
36. Effect caused partly by act and partly by omission.—Wherever the causing of a certain effect, 
or an attempt to cause that effect, by an act or by an omission, is an offence, it is to be understood that the 
causing of that effect partly by an act and partly by an omission is the same offence. 
Illustration 
A intentionally causes Z's death, partly by illegally omitting to give Z food, and party by beating Z. A has committed 
murder. 
37. Co-operation by doing one of several acts constituting an offence.—When an offence is 
committed by means of several acts, whoever intentionally co-operates in the commission of that offence 
by doing any one of those acts, either singly or jointly with any other person, commits that offence. 
Illustrations 
(a) A and B agree to murder Z by severally and at different times giving him small doses of poison. A and B administer the 
poison according to the agreement with intent to murder Z. Z dies from the effects the several doses of poison so administered to 
him. Here A and B intentionally cooperate in the commission of murder and as each of them does an act by which the death is 
caused, they are both guilty of the offence though their acts are separate. 
(b) A and B are joint jailors, and as such have the charge of Z, a prisoner, alternatively for six hours at a time. A and B, 
intending to cause Z's death, knowingly co-operate in causing that effect by illegally omitting, each during the time of his 
attendance, to furnish Z with food supplied to them for that purpose. Z dies of hunger. Both A and B are guilty of the murder of 
Z. 
(c) A, a jailor, has the charge of Z, a prisoner. A, intending to cause Z's death, illegally omits to supply Z with food; in 
consequence of which Z is much reduced in strength, but the starvation is not sufficient to cause his death. A is dismissed from 
his office, and B succeeds him. B, without collusion or co-operation with A, illegally omits to supply Z with food, knowing that 
he is likely thereby to cause Z's death. Z dies of hunger. B is guilty of murder, but, as A did not co-operate with B. A is guilty 
only of an attempt to commit murder. 
38. Persons concerned in criminal act may be guilty of different offences.—Where several 
persons are engaged or concerned in the commission of a criminal act, they may be guilty of different 
offences by means of that act. 
Illustration 
A attacks Z under such circumstances of grave provocation that his killing of Z would be only culpable homicide not 
amounting to murder. B, having ill-will towards Z and intending to kill him, and not having been subject to the provocation, 
assists A in killing Z. Here, though A and B are both engaged in causing Z's death, B is guilty of murder, and A is guilty only of 
culpable homicide. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 1, for section 34. 

20 
 
39. “Voluntarily”.—A person is said to cause an effect “voluntarily” when he causes it by means 
whereby he intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time of employing those means, he knew or 
had reason to believe to be likely to cause it. 
Illustration 
A sets fire, by night, to an inhabited house in a large town, for the purpose of facilitating a robbery and thus causes the death 
of a person. Here, A may not have intended to cause death; and may even be sorry that death has been caused by his act; yet, if he 
knew that he was likely to cause death, he has caused death voluntarily. 
1[40. “Offence”.—Except in the 2[Chapters] and sections mentioned in clauses 2 and 3 of this section, 
the word “offence” denotes a thing made punishable by this Code. 
In Chapter IV, 3[Chapter VA] and in the following sections, namely, sections 4[64, 65, 66, 5[67], 71], 
109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 116, 117,6[118, 119 and 120] 187, 194, 195, 203, 211, 213, 214, 221, 222, 223, 
224, 225, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331, 347, 348, 388, 389 and 445, the word “offence” denotes a thing 
punishable under this Code, or under any special or local law as hereinafter defined. 
And in sections 141, 176, 177, 201, 202, 212, 216 and 441, the word “offence” has the same meaning 
when the thing punishable under the special or local law is punishable under such law with imprisonment 
for a term of six months or upwards, whether with or without fine.]  
41. “Special law”.—A “special law” is a law applicable to a particular subject. 
42. “Local law”.—A “local law” is a law applicable only to a particular part of 7[8***9[India]]. 
43. “Illegal”. “Legally bound to do”.—The word “illegal” is applicable to everything which is an 
offence or which is prohibited by law, or which furnishes ground for a civil action; and a person is said to 
be “legally bound to do” whatever it is illegal in him to omit. 
44. “Injury”.—The word “injury” denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in 
body, mind, reputation or property. 
45. “Life”.—The word “life” denotes the life of a human being, unless the contrary appears from the 
context. 
46. “Death”.—The word “death” denotes the death of a human being unless the contrary appears 
from the context. 
47. “Animal”.—The word “animal” denotes any living creature, other than a human being. 
48. “Vessel”.—The word “vessel” denotes anything made for the conveyance by water of human 
beings or of property. 
49. “Year”. “Month”.—Wherever the word “year” or the word “month” is used, it is to be 
understood that the year or the month is to be reckoned according to the British calendar. 
50. “Section”.—The word “section” denotes one of those portions of a Chapter of this Code which 
are distinguished by prefixed numeral figures. 
51. “Oath”.—The word “oath” includes a solemn affirmation substituted by law for an oath, and any 
declaration required or authorised by law to be made before a public servant or to be used for the purpose 
of proof, whether in a Court of Justice or not. 
52. “Good faith”.—Nothing is said to be done or believed in “good faith” which is done or believed 
without due care and attention. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 2, for section 40. 
2. Subs. by Act 8 of 1930, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “Chapter”. 
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1913, s. 2. 
4. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 1. 
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21 (1). 
6. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51 (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
7. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “British India”. 
8. The words “the territories comprised in” omitted by Act 48 of 1952, s. 3 and the Second Sch. 
9. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the States” which had been subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Provinces”. 

21 
 
1[52A. “Harbour”.—Except in section 157, and in section 130 in the case in which the harbour is 
given by the wife or husband of the person harboured, the word “harbour” includes the supplying a person 
with shelter, food, drink, money, clothes, arms, ammunition or means of conveyance, or the assisting a 
person by any means, whether of the same kind as those enumerated in this section or not, to evade 
apprehension.] 
CHAPTER III 
OF PUNISHMENTS 
53. Punishments.—The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Code 
are— 
First.—Death; 
2[Secondly.—Imprisonment for life;] 
3*   
 
* 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
Fourthly.—Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions, namely:— 
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour; 
(2) Simple; 
Fifthly.—Forfeiture of property; 
Sixthly.—Fine. 
4[53A. Construction of reference to transportation.—(1) Subject to the provisions of  
sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), any reference to “transportation for life” in any other law for the time 
being in force or in any instrument or order having effect by virtue of any such law or of any enactment 
repealed shall be construed as a reference to “imprisonment for life”. 
(2) In every case in which a sentence of transportation for a term has been passed before the 
commencement of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 5[1955 (26 of 1955)], the offender 
shall be dealt with in the same manner as if sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for the same term. 
(3) Any reference to transportation for a term or to transportation for any shorter term (by whatever 
name called) in any other law for the time being in force shall be deemed to have been omitted. 
(4) Any reference to “transportation” in any other law for the time being in force shall,— 
(a) if the expression means transportation for life, be construed as a reference to imprisonment for 
life; 
(b) if the expression means transportation for any shorter term, be deemed to have been omitted.] 
54. Commutation of sentence of death.—In every case in which sentence of death shall have been 
passed, 6[the appropriate Government] may, without the consent of the offender, commute the punishment 
punishment for any other punishment provided by this Code. 
55. Commutation of sentence of imprisonment for life.—In every case in which sentence of 
7[imprisonment] for life shall have been passed, 8[the appropriate Government] may, without the consent 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1942, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “Secondly.—Transportation” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. Cl. Thirdly omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-4-1949). 
4. Ins. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for “1954”. 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Central Government or the Provincial Government of the Province within which the offender 
shall have been sentenced”. The words in italics were subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the Government of India or the Government 
of the place”. 
7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
8. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “the Provincial Government of the Province within which the offender shall have been sentenced”. 
The words in italics were subs. by the A.O. 1937, for “the Government of India or the Government of the place”. 

22 
 
consent of the offender, commute the punishment for imprisonment of either description for a term not 
exceeding fourteen years. 
1[55A. Definition of “appropriate Government”.—In sections fifty-four and fifty-five the 
expression “appropriate Government” means,— 
(a) in cases where the sentence is a sentence of death or is for an offence against any law relating 
to a matter to which the executive power of the Union extends, the Central Government; and 
(b) in cases where the sentence (whether of death or not) is for an offence against any law relating 
to a matter to which the executive power of the State extends, the Government of the State within 
which the offender is sentenced.] 
56. [Sentence of Europeans and Americans to penal servitude. Proviso as to sentence for term 
exceeding ten years but not for life.] Rep. by the Criminal Law (Removal of Racial Discriminations) Act, 
1949 (17 of 1949) (w. e. f. 6-4-1949). 
57. Fractions of terms of punishment.—In calculating fractions of terms of punishment, 
2[imprisonment] for life shall be reckoned as equivalent to2[imprisonment] for twenty years. 
58. [Offenders sentenced to transportation how dealt with until transported.] Rep. by the Code of 
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1955 (26 of 1955), s. 117 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
59. [Transportation instead of imprisonment.] Rep. by s.117 and the Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
60. Sentence may be (in certain cases of imprisonment) wholly or partly rigorous or simple.—In 
every case in which an offender is punishable with imprisonment which may be of either description, it 
shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct in the sentence that such 
imprisonment shall be wholly rigorous, or that such imprisonment shall be wholly simple, or that any part 
of such imprisonment shall be rigorous and the rest simple. 
61. [Sentence of forfeiture of property.] Rep. by the Indian Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 1921  
(16 of 1921), s. 4. 
62. [Forfeiture of property, in respect of offenders punishable with death, transportation or 
imprisonment.] Rep. by s. 4 ibid.  
63. Amount of fine.—Where no sum is expressed to which a fine may extend, the amount of fine to 
which the offender is liable is unlimited, but shall not be excessive. 
64. Sentence of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.—3[In every case of an offence punishable 
with imprisonment as well as fine, in which the offender is sentenced to a fine, whether with or without 
imprisonment, 
and in every case of an offence punishable 4[with imprisonment or fine, or] with fine only, in which 
the offender is sentenced to a fine.] 
it shall be competent to the Court which sentences such offender to direct by the sentence that, in 
default of payment of the fine, the offender shall suffer imprisonment for a certain term, which 
imprisonment shall be in excess of any other imprisonment to which he may have been sentenced or to 
which he may be liable under a commutation of a sentence.  
65. Limit to imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when imprisonment and fine awardable.—
The term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned in default of payment of a fine shall 
not exceed one-fourth of the term of imprisonment which is the maximum fixed for the offence, if the 
offence be punishable with imprisonment as well as fine. 
66. Description of imprisonment for non-payment of fine.—The imprisonment which the Court 
imposes in default of payment of a fine may be of any description to which the offender might have been 
sentenced for the offence. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by the A. O 1950. Earlier ins by the A. O. 1937. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 2, for “In every case in which an offender is sentenced to a fine”. 
4. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 21 (2). 

23 
 
67. Imprisonment for non-payment of fine, when offence punishable with fine only.—If the 
offence be punishable with fine only, 1[the imprisonment which the Court imposes in default of payment 
of the fine shall be simple, and] the term for which the Court directs the offender to be imprisoned, in 
default of payment of fine, shall not exceed the following scale, that is to say, for any term not exceeding 
two months when the amount of the fine shall not exceed fifty rupees, and for any term not exceeding 
four months when the amount shall not exceed one hundred rupees, and for any term not exceeding six 
months in any other case. 
68. Imprisonment to terminate on payment of fine.—The imprisonment which is imposed in 
default of payment of a fine shall terminate whenever that fine is either paid or levied by process of law. 
69. Termination of imprisonment on payment of proportional part of fine.—If, before the 
expiration of the term of imprisonment fixed in default of payment, such a proportion of the fine be paid 
or levied that the term of imprisonment suffered in default of payment is not less than proportional to the 
part of the fine still unpaid, the imprisonment shall terminate. 
Illustration 
A is sentenced to a fine of one hundred rupees and to four months' imprisonment in default of payment. Here, if seventy-five 
rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the expiration of one month of the imprisonment, A will be discharged as soon as the 
first month has expired. If seventy-five rupees be paid or levied at the time of the expiration of the first month, or at any later 
time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be immediately discharged. If fifty rupees of the fine be paid or levied before the 
expiration of two months of the imprisonment. A will be discharged as soon as the two months are completed. If fifty rupees be 
paid or levied at the time of the expiration of those two months, or at any later time while A continues in imprisonment, A will be 
immediately discharged. 
70. Fine leviable within six years, of during imprisonment. Death not to discharge property 
from liability.—The fine, or any part thereof which remains unpaid, may be levied at any time within six 
years after the passing of the sentence, and if, under the sentence, the offender be liable to imprisonment 
for a longer period than six years, then at any time previous to the expiration of that period; and the death 
of the offender does not discharge from the liability any property which would, after his death, be legally 
liable for his debts. 
71. Limit of punishment of offence made up of several offences.—Where anything which is an 
offence is made up of parts, any of which parts is itself an offence, the offender shall not be punished with 
the punishment of more than one of such his offences, unless it be so expressly provided. 
2[Where anything is an offence falling within two or more separate definitions of any law in force for 
the time being by which offences are defined or punished, or 
where several acts, of which one or more than one would by itself or themselves constitute an 
offence, constitute, when combined, a different offence, 
the offender shall not be punished with a more severe punishment than the Court which tries him 
could award for any one of such offences]. 
Illustrations 
(a) A gives Z fifty strokes with a stick. Here A may have committed the offence of voluntarily causing hurt to Z by the 
whole beating, and also by each of the blows which make up the whole beating. If A were liable to punishment for every blow, 
he might be imprisoned for fifty years, one for each blow. But he is liable only to one punishment for the whole beating. 
(b) But, if, while A is beating Z, Y interferes, and A intentionally strikes Y, here, as the blow given to Y is no part of the act 
whereby A voluntarily causes hurt to Z, A is liable to one punishment for voluntarily causing hurt to Z, and to another for the 
blow given to Y. 
72. Punishment of person guilty of one of several offences, the judgment stating that it is 
doubtful of which.—In all cases in which judgment is given that a person is guilty of one of several 
offences specified in the judgment, but that it is doubtful of which of these offences he is guilty, the 
offender shall be punished for the offence for which the lowest punishment is provided if the same 
punishment is not provided for all. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 3. 
2. Added by s. 4, ibid. 

24 
 
73. Solitary confinement.—Whenever any person is convicted of an offence for which under this 
Code the Court has power to sentence him to rigorous imprisonment, the Court may, by its sentence, 
order that the offender shall be kept in solitary confinement for any portion or portions of the 
imprisonment to which he is sentenced, not exceeding three months in the whole, according to the 
following scale, that is to say— 
a time not exceeding one month if the term of imprisonment shall not exceed six months; 
a time not exceeding two months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed six months and1[shall not 
exceed one] year 
a time not exceeding three months if the term of imprisonment shall exceed one year. 
74. Limit of solitary confinement.—In executing a sentence of solitary confinement, such 
confinement shall in no case exceed fourteen days at a time, with intervals between the periods of solitary 
confinement of not less duration than such periods; and when the imprisonment awarded shall exceed 
three months, the solitary confinement shall not exceed seven days in any one month of the whole 
imprisonment awarded, with intervals between the periods of solitary confinement of not less duration 
than such periods. 
2[75. Enhanced punishment for certain offences under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII after 
previous conviction.—Whoever, having been convicted,— 
(a) by a Court in 3[India], of an offence punishable under Chapter XII or Chapter XVII of this 
Code with imprisonment of either description for a term of three years or upwards, 4*** 
5*  
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
shall be guilty of any offence punishable under either of those Chapters with like imprisonment for the 
like term, shall be subject for every such subsequent offence to 6[imprisonment for life], or to 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years.] 
CHAPTER IV 
GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 
76. Act done by a person bound, or by mistake of fact believing himself bound, by law.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is, or who by reason of a mistake of fact and not by 
reason of a mistake of law in good faith believes himself to be, bound by law to do it. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a soldier, fires on a mob by the order of his superior officer, in conformity with the commands of the law. A has 
committed no offence. 
(b) A, an officer of a Court of Justice, being ordered by that Court to arrest Y, and after due enquiry, believing Z to be Y, 
arrests Z. A has committed no offence. 
77. Act of Judge when acting judicially.—Nothing is an offence which is done by a Judge when 
acting judicially in the exercise of any power which is, or which in good faith he believes to be, given to 
him by law. 
78. Act done pursuant to the judgment or order of Court.—Nothing which is done in pursuance 
of, or which is warranted by the judgment or order of, a Court of Justice; if done whilst such judgment or 
order remains in force, is an offence, notwithstanding the Court may have had no jurisdiction to pass such 
judgment or order, provided the person doing the act in good faith believes that the Court had such 
jurisdiction. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1862, s. 5, for “be less than a”. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1910, s. 2, for section 75. 
3. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
4. The word “or” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch. 
5. Cl. (b) omitted by s. 3 and the Sch., ibid. 
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

25 
 
79. Act done by a person justified, or by mistake of fact believing himself, justified, by law.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by any person who is justified by law, or who by reason of a mistake 
of fact and not by reason of a mistake of law in good faith, believes himself to be justified by law, in 
doing it. 
Illustration 
A sees Z commit what appears to A to be a murder. A, in the exercise, to the best of his judgment exerted in good faith, of 
the power which the law gives to all persons of apprehending murderers in the fact, seizes Z, in order to bring Z before the proper 
authorities. A has committed no offence, though it may turn out that Z was acting in self-defence. 
80. Accident in doing a lawful act.—Nothing is an offence which is done by accident or misfortune, 
and without any criminal intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful act in a lawful manner by lawful 
means and with proper care and caution. 
Illustration 
A is at work with a hatchet; the head flies off and kills a man who is standing by. Here, if there was no want of proper 
caution on the part of A, his act is excusable and not an offence. 
81. Act likely to cause harm, but done without criminal intent, and to prevent other harm.—
Nothing is an offence merely by reason of its being done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause 
harm, if it be done without any criminal intention to cause harm, and in good faith for the purpose of 
preventing or avoiding other harm to person or property. 
Explanation.—It is a question of fact in such a case whether the harm to be prevented or avoided was 
of such a nature and so imminent as to justify or excuse the risk of doing the act with the knowledge that 
it was likely to cause harm. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, the captain of a steam vessel, suddenly, and without any fault or negligence on his part, finds himself in such a 
position that, before he can stop his vessel, he must inevitably run down a boat B, with twenty or thirty passengers on board, 
unless he changes the course of his vessel, and that, by changing his course, he must incur risk of running down a boat C with 
only two passengers on board, which he may possibly clear. Here, if A alters his course without any intention to run down the 
boat C and in good faith for the purpose of avoiding the danger to the passengers in the boat B, he is not guilty of an offence, 
though he may run down the boat C by doing an act which he knew was likely to cause that effect, if it be found as a matter of 
fact that the danger which he intended to avoid was such as to excuse him in incurring the risk of running down C. 
(b) A, in a great fire, pulls down houses in order to prevent the conflagration from spreading. He does this with the intention 
in good faith of saving human life or property. Here, if it be found that the harm to be prevented was of such a nature and so 
imminent as to excuse A's act, A is not guilty of the offence. 
82. Act of a child under seven years of age.—Nothing is an offence which is done by a child under 
seven years of age.  
83. Act of a child above seven and under twelve of immature understanding.—Nothing is an 
offence which is done by a child above seven years of age and under twelve, who has not attained 
sufficient maturity of understanding to judge of the nature and consequences of his conduct on that 
occasion. 
84. Act of a person of unsound mind.—Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the 
time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that 
he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law. 
85. Act of a person incapable of judgment by reason of intoxication caused against his will.—
Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, is, by reason of intoxication, 
incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong, or contrary to  
law: provided that the thing which intoxicated him was administered to him without his knowledge or 
against his will. 
86. Offence requiring a particular intent or knowledge committed by one who is intoxicated.—
In cases where an act done is not an offence unless done with a particular knowledge or intent, a person 
who does the act in a state of intoxication shall be liable to be dealt with as if he had the same knowledge 
as he would have had if he had not been intoxicated, unless the thing which intoxicated him was 
administered to him without his knowledge or against his will. 

26 
 
87. Act not intended and not known to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, done by 
consent.—Nothing which is not intended to cause death, or grievous hurt, and which is not known by the 
doer to be likely to cause death or grievous hurt, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, 
or be intended by the doer to cause, to any person, above eighteen years of age, who has given consent, 
whether express or implied, to suffer that harm; or by reason of any harm which it may be known by the 
doer to be likely to cause to any such person who has consented to take the risk of that harm. 
Illustration 
A and Z agree to fence with each other for amusement. This agreement implies the consent of each to suffer any harm 
which, in the course of such fencing, may be caused without foul play; and if A, while playing fairly, hurts Z, A commits no 
offence. 
88. Act not intended to cause death, done by consent in good faith for person's benefit.—
Nothing, which is not intented to cause death, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or 
be intended by the doer to cause, or be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to any person for whose 
benefit it is done in good faith, and who has given a consent, whether express or implied, to suffer that 
harm, or to take the risk of that harm. 
Illustration 
A, a surgeon, knowing that a particular operation is likely to cause the death of Z, who suffers under the painful complaint, 
but not intending to cause Z's death, and intending, in good faith, Z's benefit, performs that operation on Z, with Z's consent. A 
has committed no offence. 
89. Act done in good faith for benefit of child or insane person, by or by consent of guardian.—
Nothing which is done in good faith for the benefit of a person under twelve years of age, or of unsound 
mind, by or by consent, either express or implied, of the guardian or other person having lawful charge of 
that person, is an offence by reason of any harm which it may cause, or be intended by the doer to cause 
or be known by the doer to be likely to cause to that person: Provided— 
Provisos. First.—That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of death, or to the 
attempting to cause death; 
Secondly.—That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which the person doing 
it knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous 
hurt, or the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity; 
Thirdly.—That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing of grievous hurt, or to the 
attempting to cause grievous hurt, unless it be for the purpose of preventing death or grievous hurt, or 
the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity; 
Fourthly.—That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence, to the committing 
of which offence it would not extend. 
Illustration 
A, in good faith, for his child's benefit without his child's consent, has his child cut for the stone by a surgeon knowing it to 
be likely that the operation will cause the child's death, but not intending to cause the child's death. A is within the exception,  
inasmuch as his object was the cure of the child. 
90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception.—A consent is not such a consent as 
is intended by any section of this Code, if the consent is given by a person under fear of injury, or under a 
misconception of fact, and if the person doing the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent 
was given in consequence of such fear or misconception; or 
Consent of insane person.—if the consent is given by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or 
intoxication, is unable to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he gives his consent; or 
Consent of child.—unless the contrary appears from the context, if the consent is given by a person 
who is under twelve years of age. 
91. Exclusion of acts which are offences independently of harm cause.—The exceptions in 
sections 87, 88 and 89 do not extend to acts which are offences independently of any harm which they 
may cause, or be intended to cause, or be known to be likely to cause, to the person giving the consent, or 
on whose behalf the consent is given. 

27 
 
Illustration 
Causing miscarriage (unless caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman) is offence independently 
of any harm which it may cause or be intended to cause to the woman. Therefore, it is not an offence “by reason of such harm”; 
and the consent of the woman or of her guardian to the causing of such miscarriage does not justify the act. 
92. Act done in good faith for benefit of a person without consent.—Nothing is an offence by 
reason of any harm which it may cause to a person for whose benefit it is done in good faith, even without 
that person's consent, if the circumstances are such that it is impossible for that person to signify consent, 
or if that person is incapable of giving consent, and has no guardian or other person in lawful charge of 
him from whom it is possible to obtain consent in time for the thing to be done with benefit: Provided— 
Provisos. First.—That this exception shall not extend to the intentional causing of death, or the 
attempting to cause death; 
Secondly.—That this exception shall not extend to the doing of anything which the person doing it 
knows to be likely to cause death, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or grievous hurt, or 
the curing of any grievous disease or infirmity; 
Thirdly.—That this exception shall not extend to the voluntary causing of hurt, or to the attempting to 
cause hurt, for any purpose other than the preventing of death or hurt; 
Fourthly.—That this exception shall not extend to the abetment of any offence, to the committing of 
which offence it would not extend. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z is thrown from his horse, and is insensible. A, a surgeon, finds that Z requires to be trepanned. A, not intending Z's 
death, but in good faith, for Z's benefit, performs the trepan before Z recovers his power of judging for himself. A has committed 
no offence. 
(b) Z is carried off by a tiger. A fires at the tiger knowing it to be likely that the shot may kill Z, but not intending to kill Z, 
and in good faith intending Z's benefit. A's ball gives Z a mortal wound. A has committed no offence. 
(c) A, a surgeon, sees a child suffer an accident which is likely to prove fatal unless an operation be immediately performed. 
There is not time to apply to the child's guardian. A performs the operation in spite of the entreaties of the child, intending, in 
good faith, the child's benefit. A has committed no offence. 
(d) A is in a house which is on fire, with Z, a child. People below hold out a blanket. A drops the child from the housestop, 
knowing it to be likely that the fall may kill the child, but not intending to kill the child, and intending, in good faith, the child's 
benefit. Here, even if the child is killed by the fall, A has committed no offence. 
Explanation.—Mere pecuniary benefit is not benefit within the meaning of sections 88, 89 and 92. 
93. Communication made in good faith.—No communication made in good faith is an offence by 
reason of any harm to the person to whom it is made, if it is made for the benefit of that person. 
Illustration 
A, a surgeon, in good faith, communicates to a patient his opinion that he cannot live. The patient dies in consequence of the 
shock. A has committed no offence, though he knew it to be likely that the communication might cause the patient's death. 
94. Act to which a person is compelled by threats.—Except murder, and offences against the State 
punishable with death, nothing is an offence which is done by a person who is compelled to do it by 
threats, which, at the time of doing it, reasonably cause the apprehension that instant death to that person 
will otherwise be the consequence: Provided the person doing the act did not of his own accord, or from a 
reasonable apprehension of harm to himself short of instant death, place himself in the situation by which 
he became subject to such constraint. 
Explanation 1.—A person who, of his own accord, or by reason of a threat of being beaten, joins a 
gang of dacoits, knowing their character, is not entitled to the benefit of this exception, on the ground of 
his having been compelled by his associates to do anything that is an offence by law. 
Explanation 2.—A person seized by a gang of dacoits, and forced, by threat of instant death, to do a 
thing which is an offence by law; for example, a smith compelled to take his tools and to force the door of 
a house for the dacoits to enter and plunder it, is entitled to the benefit of this exception. 

28 
 
95. Act causing slight harm.—Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes, or that it is intended to 
cause, or that it is known to be likely to cause, any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of 
ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm. 
Of the Right of Private Defence 
96. Things done in private defence.—Nothing is an offence which is done in the exercise of the 
right of private defence. 
97. Right of private defence of the body and of property.—Every person has a right, subject to the 
restrictions contained in section 99, to defend— 
First.—His own body, and the body of any other person, against any offence affecting the human 
body; 
Secondly.—The property, whether movable or immovable, of himself or of any other person, against 
any act which is an offence falling under the defintion of theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass, or 
which is an attempt to commit theft, robbery, mischief or criminal trespass. 
98. Right of private defence against the act of a person of unsound mind, etc.—When an act, 
which would otherwise be a certain offence, is not that offence, by reason of the youth, the want of 
maturity of understanding, the unsoundness of mind or the intoxication of the person doing that act, or by 
reason of any misconception on the part of that person, every person has the same right of private defence 
against that act which he would have if the act were that offence. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z, under the influence of madness, attempts to kill A; Z is guilty of no offence. But A has the same right of private 
defence which he would have if Z were sane. 
(b) A enters by night a house which he is legally entitled to enter. Z, in good faith, taking A for a house-breaker, attacks A. 
Here Z, by attacking A under this misconception, commits no offence. But A has the same right of private defence against Z, 
which he would have if Z were not acting under that misconception. 
99. Acts against which there is no right of private defence.—There is no right of private defence 
against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or 
attempted to be done, by a public servant acting in good faith under colour of his office, though that act, 
may not be strictly justifiable by law. 
There is no right of private defence against an act which does not reasonably cause the apprehension 
of death or of grievous hurt, if done, or attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant acting in 
good faith under colour of his office, though that direction may not be strictly justifiable by law. 
There is no right of private defence in cases in which there is time to have recourse to protection of 
the public authorities. 
Extent to which the right may be exercised.—The right of private defence in no case extends to the 
inflicting of more harm than it is necessary to inflict for the purpose of defence. 
Explanation 1.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or 
attempted to be done, by a public servant, as such, unless he knows or has reason to believe, that the 
person doing the act is such public servant. 
Explanation 2.—A person is not deprived of the right of private defence against an act done, or 
attempted to be done, by the direction of a public servant, unless he knows, or has reason to believe, that 
the person doing the act is acting by such direction, or unless such person states the authority under which 
he acts, or if he has authority in writing, unless he produces such authority, if demanded. 
100. When the right of private defence of the body extends to causing death.—The right of 
private defence of the body extends, under the restrictions mentioned in the last preceding section, to the 
voluntary causing of death or of any other harm to the assailant, if the offence which occasions the 
exercise of the right be of any of the descriptions hereinafter enumerated, namely:— 
First.—Such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that death will otherwise be the 
consequence of such assault; 

29 
 
Secondly.—Such an assault as may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will 
otherwise be the consequence of such assault; 
Thirdly.—An assault with the intention of committing rape; 
Fourthly.—An assault with the intention of gratifying unnatural lust; 
Fifthly.—An assault with the intention of kidnapping or abducting; 
Sixthly.—An assault with the intention of wrongfully confining a person, under circumstances which 
may reasonably cause him to apprehend that he will be unable to have recourse to the public authorities 
for his release. 
1[Seventhly.—An act of throwing or administering acid or an attempt to throw or administer acid 
which may reasonably cause the apprehension that grievous hurt will otherwise be the consequence of 
such act.] 
101. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.—If the offence be not of 
any of the descriptions enumerated in the last preceding section, the right of private defence of the body 
does not extend to the voluntary causing of death to the assailant, but does extend, under the restrictions 
mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing to the assailant of any harm other than death. 
102. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of the body.—The right of 
private defence of the body commences as soon as a reasonable apprehension of danger to the body arises 
from an attempt or threat to commit the offence though the offence may not have been committed; and it 
continues as long as such apprehension of danger to the body continues. 
103. When the right of private defence of property extends to causing death.—The right of 
private defence of property extends, under the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary 
causing of death or of any other harm to the wrong-doer, if the offence, the committing of which, or the 
attempting to commit which, occasions the exercise of the right, be an offence of any of the descriptions 
hereinafter enumerated, namely:— 
First.—Robbery; 
Secondly.—House-breaking by night; 
Thirdly.—Mischief by fire committed on any building, tent or vessel, which building, tent or vessel is 
used as a human dwelling, or as a place for the custody of property; 
Fourthly.—Theft, mischief, or house-trespass, under such circumstances as may reasonably cause 
apprehension that death or grievous hurt will be the consequence, if such right of private defence is not 
exercised. 
104. When such right extends to causing any harm other than death.—If the offence, the 
committing of which, or the attempting to commit which occasions the exercise of the right of private 
defence, be theft, mischief, or criminal trespass, not of any of the descriptions enumerated in the last 
preceding section, that right does not extend to the voluntary causing of death, but does extend, subject to 
the restrictions mentioned in section 99, to the voluntary causing to the wrong-doer of any harm other 
than death. 
105. Commencement and continuance of the right of private defence of property.—The right of 
private defence of property commences when a reasonable apprehension of danger to the property 
commences. 
The right of private defence of property against theft continues till the offender has effected his retreat 
with the property or either the assistance of the public authorities is obtained, or the property has been 
recovered. 
The right of private defence of property against robbery continues as long as the offender causes or 
attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint or as long as the fear of instant death or 
of instant hurt or of instant personal restraint continues. 
The right of private defence of property against criminal trespass or mischief continues as long as the 
offender continues in the commission of criminal trespass or mischief. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 

30 
 
The right of private defence of property against house-breaking by night continues as long as the 
house-trespass which has been begun by such house-breaking continues. 
106. Right of private defence against deadly assault when there is risk of harm to innocent 
person.—If in the exercise of the right of private defence against an assault which reasonably causes the 
apprehension of death, the defender be so situated that he cannot effectually exercise that right without 
risk of harm to an innocent person, his right of private defence extends to the running of that risk. 
Illustration 
A is attacked by a mob who attempt to murder him. He cannot effectually exercise his right of private defence without firing 
on the mob, and he cannot fire without risk of harming young children who are mingled with the mob. A commits no offence if 
by so firing he harms any of the children. 
CHAPTER V 
OF ABETMENT 
107. Abetment of a thing.—A person abets the doing of a thing, who— 
First.—Instigates any person to do that thing; or 
Secondly.—Engages with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that 
thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order to the doing of 
that thing; or 
Thirdly.—Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing. 
Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a material 
fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause or procure, a thing 
to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that thing. 
Illustration 
A, a public officer, is authorised by a warrant from a Court of Justice to apprehend Z, B, knowing that fact and also that C is 
not Z, wilfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby intentionally causes A to apprehend C. Here B abets by instigation the 
apprehension of C. 
Explanation 2.—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act, does anything in 
order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitates the commission thereof, is said to aid 
the doing of that act. 
108. Abettor.—A person abets an offence, who abets either the commission of an offence, or the 
commission of an act which would be an offence, if committed by a person capable by law of committing 
an offence with the same intention or knowledge as that of the abettor. 
Explanation 1.—The abetment of the illegal omission of an act may amount to an offence although 
the abettor may not himself be bound to do that act. 
Explanation 2.—To constitute the offence of abetment it is not necessary that the act abetted should 
be committed, or that the effect requisite to constitute the offence should be caused. 
Illustrations 
(a) A instigates B to murder C. B refuses to do so. A is guilty of abetting B to commit murder. 
(b) A instigates B to murder D. B in pursuance of the instigation stabs D. D recovers from the wound. A is guilty of 
instigating B to commit murder. 
Explanation 3.—It is not necessary that the person abetted should be capable by law of committing an 
offence, or that he should have the same guilty intention or knowledge as that of the abettor, or any guilty 
intention or knowledge. 
 
 

31 
 
Illustrations 
(a) A, with a guilty intention, abets a child or a lunatic to commit an act which would be an offence, if committed by a 
person capable by law of committing an offence, and having the same intention as A. Here A, whether the act be committed or 
not, is guilty of abetting an offence. 
(b) A, with the intention of murdering Z, instigates B, a child under seven years of age, to do an act which causes Z's death. 
B, in consequence of the abetment, does the act in the absence of A and thereby causes Z's death. Here, though B was not capable 
by law of committing an offence, A is liable to be punished in the same manner as if B had been capable by law of committing an 
offence, and had committed murder, and he is therefore subject to the punishment of death. 
(c) A instigates B to set fire to a dwelling-house. B, in consequence of the unsoundness of his mind, being incapable of 
knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is wrong or contrary to law, sets fire to the house in consequence of A's 
instigation. B has committed no offence, but A is guilty of abetting the offence of setting fire to a dwelling-house, and is liable to 
the punishment provided for that offence. 
(d) A, intending to cause a theft to be committed, instigates B to take property belonging to Z out of Z's possession. A 
induces B to believe that the property belongs to A. B takes the property out of Z's possession, in good faith, believing it to be A's 
property. B, acting under this misconception, does not take dishonestly, and therefore does not commit theft. But A is guilty of 
abetting theft, and is liable to the same punishment as if B had committed theft. 
Explanation 4.—The abetment of an offence being an offence, the abetment of such an abetment is 
also an offence. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to instigate C to murder Z. B accordingly instigates C to murder Z, and C commits that offence in 
consequence of B's instigation. B is liable to be punished for his offence with the punishment for murder; and, as A instigated B 
to commit the offence, A is also liable to the same punishment. 
Explanation 5.—It is not necessary to the commission of the offence of abetment by conspiracy that 
the abettor should concert the offence with the person who commits it. It is sufficient if he engages in the 
conspiracy in pursuance of which the offence is committed. 
Illustration 
A concerts with B a plan for poisoning Z. It is agreed that A shall administer the poison. B then explains the plan to C 
mentioning that a third person is to administer the poison, but without mentioning A's name. C agrees to procure the poison, and 
procures and delivers it to B for the purpose of its being used in the manner explained. A administers the poison; Z dies in 
consequence. Here, though A and C have not conspired together, yet C has been engaged in the conspiracy in pursuance of which 
Z has been murdered. C has therefore committed the offence defined in this section and is liable to the punishment for murder. 
1[108A. Abetment in India of offences outside India.—A person abets an offence within the 
meaning of this Code who, in 2[India], abets the commission of any act without and beyond 2[India] 
which would constitute an offence if committed in 2[India]. 
Illustration 
A, in 2[India], instigates B, a foreigner in Goa, to commit a murder in Goa, A is guilty of abetting murder.] 
109. Punishment of abetment if the act abetted is committed in consequence and where no 
express provision is made for its punishment.—Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for the 
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence. 
Explanation.—An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is 
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which 
constitutes the abetment. 
Illustrations 
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing A some favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B 
accepts the bribe. A has abetted the offence defined in section 161. 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 4 of 1898, s. 3. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A.O. 1948, the A.O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 

32 
 
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. B, in consequence of the instigation, commits that offence. A is guilty of abetting 
that offence, and is liable to the same punishment as B. 
(c) A and B conspire to poison Z. A, in pursuance of the conspiracy, procures the poison and delivers it to B in order that he 
may administer it to Z. B, in pursuance of the conspiracy, administers the poison to Z in A's absence and thereby causes Z's 
death. Here B is guilty of murder. A is guilty of abetting that offence by conspiracy, and is liable to the punishment for murder. 
110. Punishment of abetment if person abetted does act with different intention from that of 
abettor.—Whoever abets the commission of an offence shall, if the person abetted does the act with a 
different intention or knowledge from that of the abettor, be punished with the punishment provided for 
the offence which would have been committed if the act had been done with the intention or knowledge 
of the abettor and with no other. 
111. Liability of abettor when one act abetted and different act done.—When an Act is abetted 
and a different act is done, the abettor is liable for the act done, in the same manner and to the same extent 
as if he had directly abetted it: 
Provided the act done was a probable consequence of the abetment, and was committed under the 
influence of the instigation, or with the aid or in pursuance of the conspiracy which constituted the 
abetment. 
Illustrations 
(a) A instigates a child to put poison into the food of Z, and gives him poison for that purpose. The 
child, in consequence of the instigation, by mistake puts the poison into the food of Y, which is by the 
side of that of Z. Here, if the child was acting under the influence of A's instigation, and the act done was 
under the circumstances a probable consequence of the abetment, A is liable in the same manner and to 
the same extent as if he had instigated the child to put the poison into the food of Y. 
(b) A instigates B to burn Z’s house. B sets fire to the house and at the same time commits theft of 
property there. A, though guilty of abetting the burning of the house, is not guilty of abetting the theft; for 
the theft was a distinct act, and not a probable consequence of the burning. 
(c) A instigates B and C to break into an inhabited house at midnight for the purpose of robbery, and 
provides them with arms for that purpose. B and C break into the house, and being resisted by Z, one of 
the inmates, murder Z. Here, if that murder was the probable consequence of the abetment, A is liable to 
the punishment provided for murder. 
112. Abettor when liable to cumulative punishment for act abetted and for act done.—If the act 
for which the abettor is liable under the last preceding section is committed in addition to the act abetted, 
and constitute a distinct offence, the abettor is liable to punishment for each of the offences. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to resist by force a distress made by a public servant. B, in consequence, resists that distress. In offering the 
resistance, B voluntarily causes grievous hurt to the officer executing the distress. As B has committed both the offence of 
resisting the distress, and the offence of voluntarily causing grievous hurt, B is liable to punishment for both these offences; and, 
if A knew that B was likely voluntarily to cause grievous hurt in resisting the distress A will also be liable to punishment for each 
of the offences. 
113. Liability of abettor for an effect caused by the act abetted different from that intended by 
the abettor.—When an act is abetted with the intention on the part of the abettor of causing a particular 
effect, and an act for which the abettor is liable in consequence of the abetment, causes a different effect 
from that intended by the abettor, the abettor is liable for the effect caused, in the same manner and to the 
same extent as if he had abetted the act with the intention of causing that effect, provided he knew that the 
act abetted was likely to cause that effect. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to cause grievous hurt to Z. B, in consequence of the instigation, causes grievous hurt to Z. Z dies in 
consequence. Here, if A knew that the grievous hurt abetted was likely to cause death, A is liable to be punished with the 
punishment provided for murder. 
114. Abettor present when offence is committed.—Whenever any person, who is absent would be 
liable to be punished as an abettor, is present when the act or offence for which he would be punishable in 
consequence of the abetment is committed, he shall be deemed to have committed such act or offence. 

33 
 
115. Abetment of offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.—if offence not 
committed.—Whoever abets the commission of an offence punishable with death or 1[imprisonment for 
life], shall, if that offence be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is 
made by this Code for the punishment of such abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if act causing harm be done in consequence.—and if any act for which the abettor is liable in 
consequence of the abetment, and which causes hurt to any person, is done, the abettor shall be liable to 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
Illustration 
A instigates B to murder Z. The offence is not committed. If B had murdered Z, he would have been subject to the 
punishment of death or 1[imprisonment for life]. Therefore A is liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven 
years and also to a fine; and if any hurt be done to Z in consequence of the abetment, he will be liable to imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years, and to fine. 
116. Abetment of offence punishable with imprisonment—if offence be not committed.—
Whoever abets an offence punishable with imprisonment shall, if that offence be not committed in 
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Code for the punishment of such 
abetment, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for that offence for a term which 
may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term provided for that offence; or with such fine as is 
provided for that offence, or with both; 
if abettor or person abetted be a public servant whose duty it is to prevent offence.—and if the 
abettor or the person abetted is a public servant, whose duty it is to prevent the commission of such 
offence, the abettor shall be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for that offence, for 
a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term provided for that offence, or with such fine as is 
provided for the offence, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A offers a bribe to B, a public servant, as a reward for showing. A some favour in the exercise of B's official functions. B 
refuses to accept the bribe. A is punishable under this section. 
(b) A instigates B to give false evidence. Here, if B does not give false evidence, A has nevertheless committed the offence 
defined in this section, and is punishable accordingly. 
(c) A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent robbery, abets the commission of robbery. Here, though the robbery be not 
committed, A is liable to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence, and also to fine. 
(d) B abets the commission of a robbery by A, a police-officer, whose duty it is to prevent that offence. Here, though the 
robbery be not committed, B is liable to one-half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence of robbery, and 
also to fine. 
117. Abetting commission of offence by the public or by more than ten persons.—Whoever abets 
the commission of an offence by the public generally or by any number or class of persons exceeding ten, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A affixes in a public place a placard instigating a sect consisting of more than ten members to meet at a certain time and 
place, for the purpose of attacking the members of an adverse sect, while engaged in a procession. A has committed the offence 
defined in this section. 
118. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.—
Whoever intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of 
an offence punishable with death or 1[imprisonment for life], 
 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

34 
 
1[voluntarily conceals by any act or illegal omission, or by the use of encryption or any other 
information hiding tool, the existence of a design] to commit such offence or makes any representation 
which he knows to be false respecting such design, 
if offence be committed; if offence be not committed.—shall, if that offence be committed, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or, if the 
offence be not committed, with imprisonment of either description, for a term which may extend to three 
years; and in either case shall also be liable to fine. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that dacoity is about to be committed at B, falsely informs the Magistrate that a dacoity is about to be committed 
at C, a place in an opposite direction, and thereby misleads the Magistrate with intent to facilitate the commission of the offence. 
The dacoity is committed at B in pursuance of the design. A is punishable under this section. 
119. Public servant concealing design to commit offence which it is his duty to prevent.—
Whoever, being a public servant intending to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby 
facilitate the commission of an offence which it is his duty as such public servant to prevent, 
1[voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission or by the use of encryption or any other 
information hiding tool, the existence of a design] to commit such offence, or makes any representation 
which he knows to be false respecting such design, 
if offence be committed.—shall, if the offence be committed, be punished with imprisonment of any 
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term of such 
imprisonment, or with such fine as is provided for that offence, or with both; 
if offence be punishable with death, etc.—or, if the offence be punishable with death or 
2[imprisonment for life], with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years; 
if offence be not committed.—or, if the offence be not committed, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part 
of the longest term of such imprisonment or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, an officer of police, being legally bound to give information of all designs to commit robbery which may come to his 
knowledge, and knowing that B designs to commit robbery, omits to give such information, with intent to facilitate the 
commission of that offence. Here A has by an illegal omission concealed the existence of B's design, and is liable to punishment 
according to the provision of this section. 
120. Concealing design to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.—Whoever, intending 
to facilitate or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby facilitate the commission of an offence 
punishable with imprisonment, 
voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design to commit such offence, or 
makes any representation which he knows to be false respecting such design, 
if offence be committed; if offence be not committed.—shall, if the offence be committed, be 
punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to 
one-fourth, and, if the offence be not committed, to one-eight, of the longest term of such imprisonment, 
or with such fine as is provided for the offence, or with both. 
3[CHAPTER VA 
CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY 
120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy.—When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be 
done,— 
(1) an illegal act, or 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51, for “voluntarily conceals, by any act or illegal omission, the existence of a design”  
(w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. Ins. by Act 8 of 1913, s. 3. 

35 
 
(2) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated a criminal 
conspiracy: 
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to a criminal 
conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in 
pursuance thereof. 
Explanation.—It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such agreement, or is 
merely incidental to that object. 
120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy.—(1) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to 
commit an offence punishable with death, 1[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment for a term of 
two years or upwards, shall, where no express provision is made in this Code for the punishment of such a 
conspiracy, be punished in the same manner as if he had abetted such offence. 
(2) Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy other than a criminal conspiracy to commit an offence 
punishable as aforesaid shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not 
exceeding six months, or with fine or with both.] 
CHAPTER VI 
OF OFFENCES AGAINSTTHE STATE 
121. Waging, or attempting to wage war, or abetting waging of war, against the Government of 
India.—Whoever wages war against the 2[Government of India], or attempts to wage such war, or abets 
the waging of such war, shall be punished with death, or 3[imprisonment for life] 4[and shall also be liable 
to fine]. 
5[Illustration] 
6***A joins an insurrection against the 2[Government of India]. A has committed the offence defined 
in this section. 
7*  
 
 
* 
 
 *  
 
 
* 
 
 
 *  
8[121A. Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 121.—Whoever within or without 
9[India] conspires to commit any of the offences punishable by section 121, 10*** or conspires to 
overawe, by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force, 11[the Central Government or any 
12[State] Government 13***], shall be punished with 14[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of 
either description which may extend to ten years, 15[and shall also be liable to fine]. 
Explanation.—To constitute a conspiracy under this section, it is not necessary that any act or illegal 
omission shall take place in pursuance thereof.] 
122. Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the Government of India.—
Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to wage war with the intention of either 
waging or being prepared to wage war against the 2[Government of India], shall be punished with 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”. 
3. Subs. by 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 2, for “and shall forfeit all his property”. 
5. Subs. by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for “Illustrations” 
6. The brackets and letter “(a)” omitted by s. 3 and the Second Sch., ibid. 
7. Illustration (b) omitted, by the A. O. 1950. 
8. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 4. 
9. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
10. The words “or to deprive the Queen of the sovereignty of the Provinces or of any part thereof” omitted by the A. O. 1950. 
11. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “the G. of I, or any l. G”. 
12. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Provincial”. 
13. The words “or the Government of Burma” omitted by the A. O. 1948. 
14. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life or any shorter term” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
15. Ins. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 3. 

36 
 
1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, 2[and 
shall also be liable to fine]. 
123. Concealing with intent to facilitate design to wage war.—Whoever by any act, or by any 
illegal omission, conceals the existence of a design to wage war against the 3[Government of India], 
intending by such concealment to facilitate, or knowing it to be likely that such concealment will 
facilitate, the waging of such war, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
124. Assaulting President, Governor, etc., with intent to compel or restrain the exercise of any 
lawful power.—Whoever, with the intention of inducing or compelling the 4[President] of India, or 
5[Governor 6***] of any 7[State], 8*** 9*** 10*** to exercise or refrain from exercising in any manner any 
any of the lawful powers of such 11[President or 5[Governor 6***]],  
assaults or wrongfully restrains, or attempts wrongfully to restrain, or overawes, by means of criminal 
force or the show of criminal force, or attempts so to overawe, such 11[President or 5[Governor 6***]], 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
12[124A. Sedition.—Whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible 
representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to 
excite disaffection towards, 13*** the Government established by law in 14[India], 15*** shall be punished 
with 16[imprisonment for life], to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment which may extend to 
three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine. 
Explanation 1.—The expression “disaffection” includes disloyalty and all feelings of enmity. 
Explanation 2.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the Government with a 
view to obtain their alteration by lawful means, without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt 
or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this section. 
Explanation 3.—Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or other action of the 
Government without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an 
offence under this section.] 
125. Waging war against any Asiatic Power in alliance with the Government of India.—
Whoever wages war against the Government of any Asiatic Power in alliance or at peace with the 
3[Government of India] or attempts to wage such war, or abets the waging of such war, shall be punished 
with 1[imprisonment for life], to which fine may be added, or with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, to which fine may be added, or with fine. 
 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. Subs. by Act 16 of 1921, s. 2, for “and shall forfeit all his property”. 
3. Subs. by the A. O 1950, for “Queen”. 
4. Subs. by the ibid., for “Governor General”. 
5. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “Governor”. 
6. The words “or Rajpramukh” omitted by the A. O. 1956. 
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Province” which had been subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “Presidency”. 
8. The words “or a Lieutenant-Governor” omitted by the A. O. 1937. 
9. The words “or a Member of the Council of the Governor General of India” omitted by the A.O. 1948. 
10. The words “or of the Council of any Presidency” omitted by the A. O. 1937. 
11. The words “Governor General, Governor, Lieutenant-Governor or Member of Council” have successively been amended by 
the A.O. 1937, the A. O. 1948 and the A. O. 1950 to read as above. 
12. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 5 and subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 4, for s. 124A. 
13. The words “Her Majesty or” omitted by the A.O. 1950. The words “or the Crown Representative” ins. after the word 
“Majesty” by the A. O. 1937 were omitted by the A. O. 1948. 
14. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and  
the Sch., to read as above. 
15. The words “or British Burma” ins. by the A. O. 1937 and omitted by the A. O 1948. 
16. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life or any shorter term” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

37 
 
126. Committing depredation on territories of Power at peace with the Government of India.—
Whoever commits depredation, or makes preparations to commit depredation, on the territories of any 
Power in alliance or at peace with the 1[Government of India], shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to 
forfeiture of any property used or intended to be used in committing such depredation, or acquired by 
such depredation. 
127. Receiving property taken by war or depredation mentioned in sections 125 and 126.—
Whoever receives any property knowing the same to have been taken in the commission of any of the 
offences mentioned in sections 125 and 126, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine and to forfeiture of the 
property so received. 
128. Public servant voluntarily allowing prisoner of state or war to escape.—Whoever, being a 
public servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or prisoner of war, voluntarily allows such 
prisoner to escape from any place in which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with 
2[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
129. Public servant negligently suffering such prisoner to escape.—Whoever, being a public 
servant and having the custody of any State prisoner or prisoner of war, negligently suffers such prisoner 
to escape from any place of confinement in which such prisoner is confined, shall be punished with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
130. Aiding escape of, rescuing or harbouring such prisoner.—Whoever knowingly aids or assists 
any State prisoner or prisoner of war in escaping from lawful custody, or rescues or attempts to rescue 
any such prisoner, or harbours or conceals any such prisoner who has escaped from lawful custody, or 
offers or attempts to offer any resistance to the recapture of such prisoner, shall be punished with 
2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—A State prisoner or prisoner of war, who is permitted to be at large on his parole 
within certain limits in 3[India], is said to escape from lawful custody if he goes beyond the limits within 
which he is allowed to be at large. 
CHAPTER VII 
OF OFFENCES RELATINGTO THE ARMY, 4[NAVY AND AIR FORCE] 
131. Abetting mutiny, or attempting to seduce a soldier, sailor or airman from his duty.—
Whoever abets the committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, 5[sailor or airman], in the Army, 6[Navy 
or Air Force] of the 1[Government of India] or attempts to seduce any such officer, soldier, 5[sailor or 
airman] from his allegiance or his duty, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
7[Explanation.—In this section the words “officer”, 8[“soldier”, 9[“sailor”] and “airman”] include any  
any  
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “and Navy”. 
5. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or sailor”. 
6. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Navy”. 
7. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 6. 
8. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “and soldier” 
9. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch. 

38 
 
person subject to the 1[Army Act, 2[the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950)], 3[the Naval Discipline Act, 4***the 
4***the 5Indian Navy (Discipline) Act,1934 (34 of 1934)] 6[the Air Force Act or 7[the Air Force Act, 
1950 (45 of 1950)]], as the case may be].] 
132. Abetment of mutiny, if mutiny is committed in consequence thereof.—Whoever abets the 
committing of mutiny by an officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or Air Force] of the 
10[Government of India], shall, if mutiny be committed in consequence of that abetment, be punished with 
death or with 11[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
133. Abetment of assault by soldier, sailor or airman on his superior officer, when in execution 
of his office.—Whoever abets an assault by an officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or 
Air Force] of the 10[Government of India], on any superior officer being in the execution of his office, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
134. Abetment of such assault, if the assault committed.—Whoever abets an assault by an officer, 
soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or Air Force] of the 10[Government of India], on any 
superior officer being in the execution of his office, shall, if such assault be committed in consequence of 
that abetment be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
135. Abetment of desertion of soldier, sailor or airman.—Whoever, abets the desertion of any 
officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or Air Force] of the 10[Government of India], 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
136. Harbouring deserter.—Whoever, except as hereinafter excepted, knowing or having reason to 
believe that an officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or Air Force] of the 
10[Government of India], has deserted, harbours such officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
or with both. 
Exception.—This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is given by a wife to her 
husband. 
137. Deserter concealed on board merchant vessel through negligence of master.—The master or 
person in charge of a merchant vessel, on board of which any deserter from the Army, 9[Navy or Air 
Force] of the 10[Government of India] is concealed, shall, though ignorant of such concealment, be liable 
to a penalty not exceeding five hundred rupees, if he might have known of such concealment but for some 
neglect of his duty as such master or person in charge, or but for some want of discipline on board of the 
vessel. 
138. Abetment of act of insubordination by soldier, sailor or airman.—Whoever abets what he 
knows to be an act of insubordination by an officer, soldier, 8[sailor or airman], in the Army, 9[Navy or air 
Force], of the 10[Government of India], shall, if such act of insubordination be committed in consequence 
of that abetment, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine, or with both. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “Articles or War for the better government of Her Majesty’s Army, or to 
the Articles of War contained in Act No. 5 of 1869”. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the Indian Army Act, 1911”. 
3. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch. 
4. The words “or that Act as modified by” omitted by the A. O. 1950. 
5. Now see the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957). 
6. Subs. by Act 14 of 1932, s. 130 and the Sch., for “or the Air Force Act”. 
7. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the Indian Air Force Act, 1932”. 
8. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “or sailor”. 
9. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Navy”. 
10. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”. 
11. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

39 
 
1138A. [Application of foregoing sections to the Indian Marine Service.] Rep. by the Amending Act, 
1934 (35 of 1934), s. 2 and Sch. 
139. Persons subject to certain Acts.—No person subject to 2[the Army Act, 3[the Army Act, 1950 
(46 of 1950)], the Naval Discipline Act, 4[5*** 6[the Indian Navy (Discipline) Act, 1934 (34 of 1934)], 
7[the Air Force Act or 8[the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950)]]], is subject to punishment under this Code 
Code for any of the offences defined in this Chapter. 
140. Wearing garb or carrying token used by soldier, sailor or airman.—Whoever, not being a 
soldier, 9[sailor or airman] in the Military, 10[Naval or Air] service of the 11[Government of India], wears 
any garb or carries any token resembling any garb or token used by such a soldier, 9[sailor or airman] with 
the intention that it may be believed that he is such a soldier, 9[sailor or airman], shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER VIII 
OFOFFENCES AGAINSTTHE PUBLIC TRANQUILLITY 
141. Unlawful assembly.—An assembly of five or more persons is designated an “unlawful 
assembly”, if the common object of the persons composing that assembly is— 
First.—To overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, 12[the Central or any State 
Government or Parliament or the Legislature of any State], or any public servant in the exercise of the 
lawful power of such public servant; or 
Second.—To resist the execution of any law, or of any legal process; or 
Third.—To commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or other offence; or 
Fourth.—By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to any person, to take or obtain 
possession of any property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a right of way, or of the use of 
water or other incorporeal right of which he is in possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or 
supposed right; or 
Fifth.—By means of criminal force, or show of criminal force, to compel any person to do what he is 
not legally bound to do, or to omit to do what he is legally entitled to do. 
Explanation.—An assembly which was not unlawful when it assembled, may subsequently become 
an unlawful assembly. 
142. Being member of unlawful assembly.—Whoever, being aware of facts which render any 
assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a 
member of an unlawful assembly. 
143. Punishment.—Whoever is a member of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
144. Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon.—Whoever, being armed with any 
deadly weapon, or with anything which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, is a 
member of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 1887, s. 79. 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “any Articles of War for the Army of Navy of the Queen, or for any part of 
such Army or Navy”. 
3. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the Indian Army Act, 1911”. 
4. Ins. by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and the Sch. 
5. The words “or that Act as modified by” omitted by the A. O. 1950. 
6. Now see the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957). 
7. Subs. by Act 14 of 1932, s. 130 and Sch., for “or the Air Force Act”. 
8. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the Indian Air Force Act, 1932”. 
9. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “or sailor”. 
10. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Naval”. 
11. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen”. 
12. Subs., ibid., for “the Central or any Provincial Government or Legislature”. 

40 
 
145. Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been commanded to 
disperse.—Whoever joins or continues in an unlawful assembly, knowing that such unlawful assembly 
has been commanded in the manner prescribed by law to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extent to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
146. Rioting.—Whenever force or violence is used by an unlawful assembly, or by any member 
thereof, in prosecution of the common object of such assembly, every member of such assembly is guilty 
of the offence of rioting. 
147. Punishment for rioting.—Whoever is guilty of rioting, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
148. Rioting, armed with deadly weapon.—Whoever is guilty of rioting, being armed with a deadly 
weapon or with anything which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
149. Every member of unlawful assembly guilty of offence committed in prosecution of common 
object.—If an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the 
common object of that assembly, or such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be 
committed in prosecution of that object, every person who, at the time of the committing of that offence, 
is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence. 
150. Hiring, or conniving at hiring, of persons to join unlawful assembly.—Whoever hires or 
engages, or employs, or promotes, or connives at the hiring, engagement or employment of any person to 
join or become a member of any unlawful assembly, shall be punishable as a member of such unlawful 
assembly, and for any offence which may be committed by any such person as a member of such 
unlawful assembly in pursuance of such hiring, engagement or employment, in the same manner as if he 
had been a member of such unlawful assembly, or himself had committed such offence. 
151. Knowingly joining or continuing in assembly of five or more persons after it has been 
commanded to disperse.—Whoever knowingly joins or continues in any assembly of five or more 
persons likely to cause a disturbance of the public peace, after such assembly has been lawfully 
commanded to disperse, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.—If the assembly is an unlawful assembly within the meaning of section 141, the 
offender will be punishable under section 145. 
152. Assaulting or obstructing public servant when suppressing riot, etc.—Whoever assaults or 
threatens to assault, or obstructs or attempts to obstruct, any public servant in the discharge of his duty as 
such public servant, in endeavouring to disperse an unlawful assembly, or to suppress a riot or affray, or 
uses, or threatens, or attempts to use criminal force to such public servant, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
153. Wantonly giving provocation with intent to cause riot—if rioting be committed; if not 
committed.—Whoever malignantly, or wantonly by doing anything which is illegal, gives provocation to 
any person intending or knowing it to be likely that such provocation will cause the offence of rioting to 
be committed, shall, if the offence of rioting be committed in consequence of such provocation, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, 
or with both; and if the offence of rioting be not committed, with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
1[153A. Promoting enmity between different groups on ground of religion, race, place of birth, 
residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony.—(1) Whoever— 
(a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise, 
promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, 
caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-
will between different religious, racials, language or regional groups or castes or communities, or 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 1969, s. 2, for section 153A. 

41 
 
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between different 
religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and which disturbs or is likely 
to disturb the public tranquillity, 1[or] 
1[(c) organizes any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity intending that the 
participants in such activity shall use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to 
be likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence, 
or participates in such activity intending to use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or 
knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force 
or violence, against any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community and such 
activity for any reason whatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a feeling of insecurity 
amongst members of such religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community,] 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Offence committed in place of worship, etc.—Whoever commits an offence specified in  
sub-section (1) in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the performance of religious 
worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to five years 
and shall also be liable to fine.] 
2[153AA. Punishment for knowingly carrying arms in any procession or organising, or holding 
or taking part in any mass drill or mass training with arms.—Whoever knowingly carries arms in any 
procession or organizes or holds or takes part in any mass drill or mass training with arms in any public 
place in contravention of any public notice or order issued or made under section 144A of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. 
Explanation.—“Arms” means articles of any description designed or adapted as weapons for offence 
or defence and includes firearms, sharp edged weapons, lathis, dandas and sticks]. 
 1[153B. Imputations, assertions prejudicial to national integration.—(1) Whoever, by words 
either spoken or written or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise,— 
(a) makes or publishes any imputation that any class of persons cannot, by reason of their being 
members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community, bear true faith 
and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established or uphold the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, or 
(b) asserts, counsels, advises, propagates or publishes that any class of persons shall, by reason of 
their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community, be 
denied, or deprived of their rights as citizens of India, or 
(c) makes or publishes and assertion, counsel, plea or appeal concerning the obligation of any 
class of persons, by reason of their being members of any religious, racial, language or regional group 
or caste or community, and such assertion, counsel, plea or appeal causes or is likely to cause 
disharmony or feelings of enmity or hatred or ill-will between such members and other persons, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(2) Whoever commits an offence specified in sub-section (1) in any place of worship or in any 
assembly engaged in the performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with 
imprisonment which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.] 
154. Owner or occupier of land on which an unlawful assembly is held.—Whenever any unlawful 
assembly or riot takes place, the owner or occupier of the land upon which such unlawful assembly is 
held, or such riot is committed, and any person having or claiming an interest in such land, shall be 
punishable with fine not exceeding one thousand rupees, if he or his agent or manager, knowing that such 
offence is being or has been committed, or having reason to believe it is likely to be committed, do not 
give the earliest notice thereof in his or their power to the principal officer at the nearest police-station,  
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1972, s. 2. 
2. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 44 (w.e.f. 23-6-2005). 

42 
 
and do not, in the case of his or their having reason to believe that it was about to be committed, use all 
lawful means in his or their power to prevent it and, in the event of its taking place, do not use all lawful 
means in his or their power to disperse or suppress the riot or unlawful assembly. 
155. Liability of person for whose benefit riot is committed.—Whenever a riot is committed for 
the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the owner or occupier of any land respecting which such riot 
takes place or who claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any dispute which gave rise to the 
riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, such person shall be punishable with fine, if 
he or his agent or manager, having reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed or that the 
unlawful assembly by which such riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not respectively use all 
lawful means in his or their power to prevent such assembly or riot from taking place, and for suppressing 
and dispersing the same. 
156. Liability of agent of owner or occupier for whose benefit riot is committed.—Whenever a 
riot is committed for the benefit or on behalf of any person who is the owner or occupier of any land 
respecting which such riot takes place, or who claims any interest in such land, or in the subject of any 
dispute which gave rise to the riot, or who has accepted or derived any benefit therefrom, 
the agent or manager of such person shall be punishable with fine, if such agent or manager, having 
reason to believe that such riot was likely to be committed, or that the unlawful assembly by which such 
riot was committed was likely to be held, shall not use all lawful means in his power to prevent such riot 
or assembly from taking place and for suppressing and dispersing the same. 
157. Harbouring persons hired for an unlawful assembly.—Whoever harbours, receives or 
assembles, in any house or premises in his occupation or charge, or under his control any persons 
knowing that such persons have been hired, engaged or employed, or are about to be hired, engaged or 
employed, to join or become members of an unlawful assembly, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
158. Being hired to take part in an unlawful assembly or riot.—Whoever is engaged, or hired, or 
offers or attempts to be hired or engaged, to do or assist in doing any of the acts specified in section 141, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine, or with both, 
or to go armed.—and whoever, being so engaged or hired as aforesaid, goes armed, or engages or 
offers to go armed, with any deadly weapon or with anything which used as a weapon of offence is likely 
to cause death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
159. Affray.—When two or more persons, by fighting in a public place, disturb the public peace, they 
are said to “commit an affray”. 
160. Punishment for committing affray.—Whoever commits an affray, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may 
extend to one hundred rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER IX 
OFOFFENCES BY OR RELATING TO PUBLIC SERVANTS 
161. [Public servant taking a gratification  other than legal  remuneration, in respect  of an  official 
act.] Rep. by the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988), s. 31. 
162. [Taking a gratification, in order, by corrupt or illegal means, to influence a public servant.] Rep. 
by s. 31, ibid. 
163. [Taking a gratification for the exercise of personal influence with a public servant.] Rep. by          
s. 31, ibid. 
164. [Punishment for abetment by public servant of the offences above  defined.] Rep. by s. 31, ibid. 
165. [Public servant obtaining any valuable thing, without consideration, from person concerned in 
any proceeding or business transacted by such  public servant.] Rep. by s. 31, ibid. 
 

43 
 
 165A. [Punishment for abetment of offences defined in section 161 or section 165.] Rep. by the 
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988), s. 31. 
166. Public servant disobeying law, with intent to cause injury to any person.—Whoever, being a 
public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the law as to the way in which he is to conduct 
himself as such public servant, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will by such 
disobedience, cause injury to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
 
 IIIustration 
A, being an officer directed by law to take property in execution, in order to satisfy a decree pronounced in Z's favour by a 
Court of Justice, knowingly disobeys that direction of law, with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause injury to Z. A 
has committed the offence defined in this section. 
1[166A. Public servant disobeying direction under law.—Whoever, being a public servant,— 
(a) knowingly disobeys any direction of the law which prohibits him from requiring the 
attendance at any place of any person for the purpose of investigation into an offence or any other 
matter, or 
(b) knowingly disobeys, to the prejudice of any person, any other direction of the law regulating 
the manner in which he shall conduct such investigation, or 
(c) fails to record any information given to him under sub-section (1) of section 154 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in relation to cognizable offence punishable under section 
326A, section 326B, section 354, section 354B, section 370, section 370A, section 376, section 376A, 
2[section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], section 
376E or section 509, 
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 
which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
166B. Punishment for non-treatment of victim.—Whoever, being in charge of a hospital, public or 
private, whether run by the Central Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other person, 
contravenes the provisions of section 357C of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall be 
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.] 
167. Public servant framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury.—Whoever, being 
a public servant, and being, as 3[such public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of any 
document or electronic record, frames, prepares or translates that document or electronic record] in a 
manner which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause or knowing it to be likely 
that he may thereby cause injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
168. Public servant unlawfully engaging in trade.—Whoever, being a public servant, and being 
legally bound as such public servant not to engage in trade, engages in trade, shall be punished with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
169. Public servant unlawfully buying or bidding for property.—Whoever, being a public servant, 
and being legally bound as such public servant, not to purchase or bid for certain property, purchases or 
bids for that property, either in his own name or in the name of another, or jointly, or in shares with 
others, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both; and the property, if purchased, shall be confiscated. 
170. Personating a public servant.—Whoever pretends to hold any particular office as a public 
servant, knowing that he does not hold such office or falsely personates any other person holding such 
office, and in such assumed character does or attempts to do any act under colour of such office, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 3 (w.e.f. 03-02-2013). 
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 2, for “section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).   
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 

44 
 
171. Wearing garb or carrying token used by public servant with fraudulent intent.—Whoever, 
not belonging to a certain class of public servants, wears any garb or carries any token resembling any 
garb or token used by that class of public servants, with the intention that it may be believed, or with the 
knowledge that it is likely to be believed, that he belongs to that class of public servants, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
1[CHAPTER IXA 
OF OFFENCESRELATING TO ELECTIONS 
171A. “Candidate”, “Electoral right” defined.—For the purposes of this Chapter— 
2[(a) “candidate” means a person who has been nominated as a candidate at any election;] 
(b) “electoral right” means the right of a person to stand, or not to stand as, or to withdraw from 
being, a candidate or to vote or refrain from voting at an election. 
171B. Bribery.—(1) Whoever— 
(i) gives a gratification to any person with the object of inducing him or any other person to 
exercise any electoral right or of rewarding any person for having exercised any such right; or 
(ii) accepts either for himself or for any other person any gratification as a reward for exercising 
any such right or for inducing or attempting to induce any other person to exercise any such right, 
commits the offence of bribery: 
Provided that a declaration of public policy or a promise of public action shall not be an offence 
under this section. 
(2) A person who offers, or agrees to give, or offers or attempts to procure, a gratification shall be 
deemed to give a gratification. 
(3) A person who obtains or agrees to accept or attempts to obtain a gratification shall be deemed to 
accept a gratification, and a person who accepts a gratification as a motive for doing what he does not 
intend to do, or as a reward for doing what he has not done, shall be deemed to have accepted the 
gratification as a reward. 
171C. Undue influence at elections.—(1) Whoever voluntarily interferes or attempts to interfere 
with the free exercise of any electoral right commits the offence of undue influence at an election. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1), whoever— 
(a) threatens any candidate or voter, or any person in whom a candidate or voter is interested, 
with injury of any kind, or 
(b) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or voter to believe that he or any person in whom he 
is interested will become or will be rendered an object of Divine displeasure or of spiritual censure, 
shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of the electoral right of such candidate or voter, within 
the meaning of sub-section (1).  
(3) A declaration of public policy or a promise of public action or the mere exercise or a legal right 
without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed to be interference within the 
meaning of this section. 
171D. Personation at elections.—Whoever at an election applies for a voting paper on votes in the 
name of any other person, whether living or dead, or in a fictitious name, or who having voted once at 
such election applies at the same election for a voting paper in his own name, and whoever abets, 
procures or attempts to procure the voting by any person in any such way, commits the offence of 
personation at an election. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 1920, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 40 of 1975, s. 9, for cl. (a). 

45 
 
1[Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a person who has been authorised to vote as 
proxy for an elector under any law for the time being in force in so far as he votes as a proxy for such 
elector.] 
171E. Punishment for bribery.—Whoever commits the offence of bribery shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both: 
Provided that bribery by treating shall be punished with fine only. 
Explanation.—“Treating” means that form of bribery where the gratification consists in food, drink, 
entertainment, or provision. 
171F. Punishment for undue influence or personation at an election.—Whoever commits the 
offence of undue influence or personation at an election shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, or with both. 
171G. False statement in connection with an election.—Whoever with intent to affect the result of 
an election makes or publishes any statement purporting to be a statement of fact which is false and which 
he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, in relation to the personal character 
or conduct of any candidate shall be punished with fine. 
171H. Illegal payments in connection with an election.—Whoever without the general or special 
authority in writing of a candidate incurs or authorises expenses on account of the holding of any public 
meeting, or upon any advertisement, circular or publication, or in any other way whatsoever for the 
purpose of promoting or procuring the election of such candidate, shall be punished with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees: 
Provided that if any person having incurred any such expenses not exceeding the amount of ten 
rupees without authority obtains within ten days from the date on which such expenses were incurred the 
approval in writing of the candidate, he shall be deemed to have incurred such expenses with the authority 
of the candidate. 
171-I. Failure to keep election accounts.—Whoever being required by any law for the time being in 
force or any rule having the force of law to keep accounts of expenses incurred at or in connection with an 
election fails to keep such accounts shall be punished with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.] 
CHAPTER X 
OF CONTEMPTSOF THE LAWFUL AUTHORITYOF PUBLIC SERVANTS 
172. Absconding to avoid service of summons or other proceeding.—Whoever absconds in order 
to avoid being served with a summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally 
competent, as such public servant, to issue such summons, notice or order, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both; 
or, if the summons or notice or order is to attend in person or by agent, or to 2[produce a document or 
an electronic record in a Court of Justice], with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
173. Preventing service of summons or other proceeding, or preventing publication thereof.—
Whoever in any manner intentionally prevents the serving on himself, or on any other person, of any 
summons, notice or order proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, 
to issue such summons, notice or order, 
or intentionally prevents the lawful affixing to any place of any such summons, notice or order, 
or intentionally removes any such summons, notice or order from any place to which it is lawfully 
affixed, 
or intentionally prevents the lawful making of any proclamation, under the authority of any public 
servant legally competent, as such public servant, to direct such proclamation to be made, 
                                                          
1. The proviso ins. by Act 24 of 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f. 22-9-2003). 
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “produce a document in a Court of Justice” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 

46 
 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; 
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent, or 1[to produce a 
document or electronic record in a Court of Justice] with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
174. Non-attendance in obedience to an order from public servant.—Whoever, being legally 
bound to attend in person or by an agent at a certain place and time in obedience to a summons, notice, 
order, or proclamation proceeding from any public servant legally competent, as such public servant, to 
issue the same, 
intentionally omits to attend at that place or time, or departs from the place where he is bound to 
attend before the time at which it is lawful for him to depart, 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; 
or, if the summons, notice, order or proclamation is to attend in person or by agent in a Court of 
Justice, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, being legally bound to appear before the 2[High Court] at Calcutta, in obedience to a subpoena issuing from that 
Court, intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A, being legally bound to appear before a 3[District Judge], as a witness, in obedience to a summons issued by that 
2[District Judge] intentionally omits to appear. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
4[174A .Non-appearance in response to a proclamation under section 82 of Act 2 of 1974.—
Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and the specified time as required by a proclamation 
published under sub-section (1) of section 82 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both, and where a 
declaration has been made under sub-section (4) of that section pronouncing him as a proclaimed 
offender, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and shall 
also be liable to fine.] 
175. Omission to produce document to public servant by person legally bound to produce it.—
Whoever, being legally bound to produce or deliver up any 5[document or electronic record] to any public 
servant, as such, intentionally omits so to produce or deliver up the same, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both; 
or, if the 4[document or electronic record] is to be produced or delivered up to a Court of Justice, with 
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, being legally bound to produce a document before a 6[District Court], intentionally omits to produce the same. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
176. Omission to give notice or information to public servant by person legally bound to give 
it.—Whoever, being legally bound to give any notice or to furnish information on any subject to any 
public servant, as such, intentionally omits to give such notice or to furnish such information in the 
manner and at the time required by law, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “to produce a document in a Court of Justice” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Supreme Court”. 
3. Subs. ibid., for “Zila Judge”. 
4. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 44 (w.e.f. 23-6-2005). 
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “document” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
6. Subs. by the A.O. 1950, for “Zila Court”. 

47 
 
or, if the notice or information required to be given respects the commission of an offence, or is 
required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the apprehension of an 
offender, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; 
1[or, if the notice or information required to be given is required by an order passed under  
sub-section (1) of section 565 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both.] 
177. Furnishing false information.—Whoever, being legally bound to furnish information on any 
subject to any public servant, as such, furnishes, as true, information on the subject which he knows or 
has reason to believe to be false shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; 
or, if the information which he is legally bound to give respects the commission of an offence, or is 
required for the purpose of preventing the commission of an offence, or in order to the apprehension of an 
offender, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a landholder, knowing of the commission of a murder within the limits of his estate, wilfully misinforms the 
Magistrate of the district that the death has occurred by accident in consequence of the bite of a snake. A is guilty of the offence 
defined in this section. 
(b) A, a village watchman, knowing that a considerable body of strangers has passed through his village in order to commit 
a dacoity in the house of Z, a wealthy merchant residing in a neighbouring place, and being bound under clause 5, section VII, 
2Regulation III, 1821, of the Bengal Code, to give early and punctual information of the above fact to the officer of the nearest 
police-station, wilfully misinforms the police officer that a body of suspicious characters passed through the village with a view 
to commit dacoity in a certain distant place in a different direction. Here A is guilty of the offence defined in the latter part of this 
section. 
3[Explanation.—In section 176 and in this section the word “offence” includes any act committed at 
any place out of 4[India], which, if committed in 3[India], would be punishable under any of the following 
following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 
450, 457, 458, 459 and 460; and the word “offender” includes any person who is alleged to have been 
guilty of any such act.] 
178. Refusing oath or affirmation when duly required by public servant to make it.—Whoever 
refuses to bind himself by an oath 5[or affirmation] to state the truth, when required so to bind himself by 
a public servant legally competent to require that he shall so bind himself, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
179. Refusing to answer public servant authorised to question.—Whoever, being legally bound to 
state the truth on any subject to any public servant, refuses to answer any question demanded of him 
touching that subject by such public servant in the exercise of the legal powers of such public servant, 
shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
180. Refusing to sign statement.—Whoever refuses to sign any statement made by him, when 
required to sign that statement by a public servant legally competent to require that he shall sign that 
statement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
181. False statement on oath or affirmation to public servant or person authorised to 
administer an oath or affirmation.—Whoever, being legally bound by an oath 4[or affirmation] to state 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 22 of 1939, s. 2. 
2. Rep. by Act 17 of 1862, s. VII and Sch. 
3. Added by Act 3 of 1894, s. 5. 
4. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
5. Ins. by Act 10 of 1873, s. 15. 

48 
 
the truth on any subject to any public servant or other person authorized by law to administer such oath 
1[or affirmation], makes, to such public servant or other person as aforesaid, touching that subject, any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
2[182. False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to the 
injury of another person.—Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or 
believes to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, such 
public servant— 
(a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or omit if the true state of 
facts respecting which such information is given were known by him, or 
(b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or annoyance of any person, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A informs a Magistrate that Z, a police-officer, subordinate to such Magistrate, has been guilty of neglect of duty or 
misconduct, knowing such information to be false, and knowing it to be likely that the information will cause the Magistrate to 
dismiss Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A falsely informs a public servant that Z has contraband salt in a secret place, knowing such information to be false, and 
knowing that it is likely that the consequence of the information will be a search of Z's premises, attended with annoyance to Z. A 
has committed the offence defined in this section. 
(c) A falsely informs a policeman that he has been assaulted and robbed in the neighbourhood of a particular village. He 
does not mention the name of any person as one of his assailants, but knows it to be likely that in consequence of this information 
the police will make enquiries and institute searches in the village to the annoyance of the villagers or some of them. A has 
committed an offence under this section.] 
183. Resistance to the taking of property by the lawful authority of a public servant.—Whoever 
offers any resistance to the taking of any property by the lawful authority of any public servant, knowing 
or having reason to believe that he is such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
184. Obstructing sale of property offered for sale by authority of public servant.—Whoever 
intentionally obstructs any sale of property offered for sale by the lawful authority of any public servant, 
as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one 
month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
185. Illegal purchase or bid for property offered for sale by authority of public servant.—
Whoever, at any sale of property held by the lawful authority of a public servant, as such, purchases or 
bids for any property on account of any person, whether himself or any other, whom he knows to be 
under a legal incapacity to purchase that property at that sale, or bids for such property not intending to 
perform the obligations under which he lays himself by such bidding, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
186. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public functions.—Whoever voluntarily obstructs 
any public servant in the discharge of his public functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both. 
187. Omission to assist public servant when bound by law to give assistance.—Whoever, being 
bound by law to render or furnish assistance to any public servant in the execution of his public duty, 
intentionally omits to give such assistance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees, or with both; 
                                                          
1. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
2. Subs. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 1, for section 182. 

49 
 
and if such assistance be demanded of him by a public servant legally competent to make such demand 
for the purposes of executing any process lawfully issued by a Court of Justice, or of preventing the 
commission of an offence, or suppressing a riot, or affray, or of apprehending a person charged with or 
guilty of an offence, or of having escaped from lawful custody, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both. 
188. Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant.—Whoever, knowing that, by an 
order promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, he is directed to 
abstain from a certain act, or to take certain order with certain property in his possession or under his 
management, disobeys such direction, 
shall, if such disobedience causes or tends to cause obstruction, annoyance or injury, or risk of 
obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any persons lawfully employed, be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month or with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees, or with both; 
and if such disobedience causes or tends to cause danger to human life, health or safety, or causes or 
tends to cause a riot or affray, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Explanation.—It is not necessary that the offender should intend to produce harm, or contemplate his 
disobedience as likely to produce harm. It is sufficient that he knows of the order which he disobeys, and 
that his disobedience produces, or is likely to produce, harm. 
Illustration 
An order is promulgated by a public servant lawfully empowered to promulgate such order, directing that a religious 
procession shall not pass down a certain street. A knowingly disobeys the order, and thereby causes danger of riot. A has 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
189. Threat of injury to public servant.—Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any public 
servant, or to any person in whom he believes that public servant to be interested, for the purpose of 
inducing that public servant to do any act, or to forbear or delay to do any act, connected with the exercise 
of the public functions of such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
190. Threat of injury to induce person to refrain from applying for protection to public 
servant.—Whoever holds out any threat of injury to any person for the purpose of inducing that person to 
refrain or desist from making a legal application for protection against any injury to any public servant 
legally empowered as such to give such protection, or to cause such protection to be given, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, 
or with both. 
CHAPTER XI 
OF FALSE EVIDENCEAND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE 
191. Giving false evidence.—Whoever, being legally bound by an oath or by an express provision of 
law to state the truth, or being bound by law to make a declaration upon any subject, makes any statement 
which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, is said to 
give false evidence. 
Explanation1.—A statement is within the meaning of this section, whether it is made verbally or 
otherwise. 
Explanation 2.—A false statement as to the belief of the person attesting is within the meaning of this 
section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by stating that he believes a thing which he 
does not believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing which he does not know. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, in support of a just claim which B has against Z for one thousand rupees, falsely swears on a trial that he heard Z 
admit the justice of B's claim. A has given false evidence. 
(b) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he believes a certain signature to be the handwriting of Z, when 
he does not believe it to be the handwriting of Z. Here A states that which he knows to be false, and therefore gives false 
evidence. 

50 
 
(c) A, knowing the general character of Z's handwriting, states that he believes a certain signature to be the handwriting of 
Z; A in good faith believing it to be so. Here A's statement is merely as to his belief, and is true as to his belief, and therefore, 
although the signature may not be the handwriting of Z, A has not given false evidence. 
(d) A, being bound by an oath to state the truth, states that he knows that Z was at a particular place on a particular day, not 
knowing anything upon the subject. A gives false evidence whether Z was at that place on the day named or not. 
(e) A, an interpreter or translator, gives or certifies as a true interpretation or translation of a statement or document which 
he is bound by oath to interpret or translate truly, that which is not and which he does not believe to be a true interpretation or 
translation. A has given false evidence. 
192. Fabricating false evidence.—Whoever causes any circumstance to exist or 1[makes any false 
entry in any book or record, or electronic record or makes any document or electronic record containing a 
false statement,] intending that such circumstance, false entry or false statement may appear in evidence 
in a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public servant as such, or before an 
arbitrator, and that such circumstance, false entry or false statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause 
any person who in such proceeding is to form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneous 
opinion touching any point material to the result of such proceeding is said “to fabricate false evidence”. 
Illustrations 
(a) A puts jewels into a box belonging to Z, with the intention that they may be found in that box, and that this circumstance 
may cause Z to be convicted of theft. A has fabricated false evidence. 
(b) A makes a false entry in his shop-book for the purpose of using it as corroborative evidence in a Court of Justice. A has 
fabricated false evidence. 
(c) A, with the intention of causing Z to be convicted of a criminal conspiracy, writes a letter in imitation of Z's handwriting, 
purporting to be addressed to an accomplice in such criminal conspiracy, and puts the letter in a place which he knows that the 
officers of the police are likely to search. A has fabricated false evidence. 
193. Punishment for false evidence.—Whoever intentionally gives false evidence in any of a 
judicial proceeding, or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a judicial 
proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
and whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any other case, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
Explanation 1.—A trial before a Court-martial2***is a judicial proceeding. 
Explanation 2.—An investigation directed by law preliminary to a proceeding before a Court of 
Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may not take place before a Court of 
Justice. 
Illustration 
A, in an enquiry before a Magistrate for the purpose of ascertaining whether Z ought to be committed for trial, makes on 
oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A as given false evidence. 
Explanation 3.—An investigation directed by a Court of Justice according to law, and conducted 
under the authority of a Court of Justice, is a stage of a judicial proceeding, though that investigation may 
not take place before a Court of Justice. 
Illustration 
A, in an enquiry before an officer deputed by a Court of Justice to ascertain on the spot the boundaries of land, makes on 
oath a statement which he knows to be false. As this enquiry is a stage of a judicial proceeding, A has given false evidence. 
194. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of capital offence.—
Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he 
will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an offence which is capital 3[by the law for the time 
being in force in 4[India]] shall be punished with 5[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
2. The words “or before a Military Court of Request” rep. by Act 13 of 1889, s. 2 and Sch. 
3. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “by the law of British India or England”. 
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “the States”. 
5. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

51 
 
If innocent person be thereby convicted and executed.—and if an innocent person be convicted 
and executed in consequence of such false evidence, the person who gives such false evidence shall be 
punished either with death or the punishment hereinbefore described. 
195. Giving or fabricating false evidence with intent to procure conviction of offence punishable 
with imprisonment for life or imprisonment.—Whoever gives or fabricates false evidence intending 
thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any person to be convicted of an 
offence which 1[by the law for the time being in force in 2[India]] is not capital, but punishable with 
3[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for a term of seven years or upwards, shall be punished as a 
person convicted of that offence would be liable to be punished. 
Illustration 
A gives false evidence before a Court of Justice, intending thereby to cause Z to be convicted of a dacoity. The punishment 
of dacoity is 4[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, with or without fine. 
A, therefore, is liable to 5[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment, with or without fine. 
6[195A. Threatening any person to give false evidence.—Whoever threatens another with any 
injury to his person, reputation or property or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person 
is interested, with intent to cause that person to give false evidence shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both; 
and if innocent person is convicted and sentenced in consequence of such false evidence, with death 
or imprisonment for more than seven years, the person who threatens shall be punished with the same 
punishment and sentence in the same manner and to the same extent such innocent person is punished and 
sentenced.] 
196. Using evidence known to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use as true or 
genuine evidence any evidence which he knows to be false or fabricated, shall be punished in the same 
manner as if he gave or fabricated false evidence. 
197. Issuing or signing false certificate.—Whoever issues or signs any certificate required by law to 
be given or signed, or relating to any fact of which such certificate is by law admissible in evidence, 
knowing or believing that such certificate is false in any material point, shall be punished in the same 
manner as if he gave false evidence. 
198. Using as true a certificate known to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to use any 
such certificate as a true certificate, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished 
in the same manner as if he gave false evidence. 
199. False statement made in declaration which is by law receivable as evidence.—Whoever, in 
any declaration made or subscribed by him, which declaration any Court of Justice, or any public servant 
or other person, is bound or authorised by law to receive as evidence of any fact, makes any statement 
which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, touching 
any point material to the object for which the declaration is made or used, shall be punished in the same 
manner as if he gave false evidence. 
200. Using as true such declaration knowing it to be false.—Whoever corruptly uses or attempts to 
use as true any such declaration, knowing the same to be false in any material point, shall be punished in 
the same manner as if he gave false evidence. 
Explanation.—A declaration which is inadmissible merely upon the ground of some informality, is a 
declaration within the meaning of sections 199 and 200. 
201. Causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen 
offender.—Whoever, knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, causes 
any evidence of the commission of that offence to disappear, with the intention of screening the offender 
from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any information respecting the offence which he 
knows or believes to be false, 
                                                          
1. Subs. by the A.O. 1948, for “by the law of British India or England”. 
2. Subs.by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and Schedule, for “the States”. 
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and Schedule, for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
4. Subs. by s. 117 and the Schedule, ibid., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
5. Subs. by s. 117 and the Schedule, ibid., for “such transportation” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
6. Ins. by Act 2 of 2006, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-4-2006). 

52 
 
if a capital offence.—shall, if the offence which he knows or believes to have been committed is 
punishable with death be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life.—and if the offence is punishable with 1[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with less than ten years’ imprisonment.—and if the offence is punishable with 
imprisonment for any term not extending to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the 
description provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term 
of the imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that B has murdered Z, assists B to hide the body with the intention of screening B from punishment. A is liable 
to imprisonment of either description for seven years, and also to fine.  
202. Intentional omission to give information of offence by person bound to inform.—Whoever, 
knowing or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed, intentionally omits to give any 
information respecting that offence which he is legally bound to give, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
203. Giving false information respecting an offence committed.—Whoever, knowing or having 
reason to believe that an offence has been committed, gives any information respecting that offence which 
he knows or believes to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
1[Explanation.—In sections 201 and 202 and in this section the word “offence” includes any act 
committed at any place out of 2[India], which, if committed in 2[India], would be punishable under any of 
the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 
450, 457, 458, 459 and 460.] 
204. Destruction of document to prevent its production as evidence.—Whoever secretes or 
destroys any 3[document and electronic record] which he may be lawfully compelled to produce as 
evidence in a Court of Justice, or in any proceeding lawfully held before a public servant, as such, or 
obliterates or renders illegible the whole or any part of such 3[document or electronic record] with the 
intention of preventing the same from being produced or used as evidence before such Court or public 
servant as aforesaid, or after he shall have been lawfully summoned or required to produce the same for 
that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
205. False personation for purpose of act or proceeding in suit or prosecution.—Whoever falsely 
personates another, and in such assumed character makes any admission or statement, or confesses 
judgment, or causes any process to be issued or becomes bail or security, or does any other act in any suit 
or criminal prosecution, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
206. Fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in 
execution.—Whoever fraudulently removes, conceals, transfers or delivers to any person any property or 
any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a 
forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to 
be likely to be pronounced, by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or from being taken in 
execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a 
Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years or with fine, or with both. 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 3 of 1894, s. 6. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “document” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 

53 
 
207. Fraudulent claim to property to prevent its seizure as forfeited or in execution.—Whoever 
fraudulently accepts, receives or claims any property or any interest therein, knowing that he has no right 
or rightful claim to such property or interest, or practices any deception touching any right to any property 
or any interest therein, intending thereby to prevent that property or interest therein from being taken as a 
forfeiture or in satisfaction of a fine, under a sentence which has been pronounced, or which he knows to 
be likely to be pronounced by a Court of Justice or other competent authority, or from being taken in 
execution of a decree or order which has been made, or which he knows to be likely to be made by a 
Court of Justice in a civil suit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
208. Fraudulently suffering decree for sum not due.—Whoever fraudulently causes or suffers a 
decree or order to be passed against him at the suit of any person for a sum not due or for a larger sum 
than is due to such person or for any property or interest in property to which such person is not entitled, 
or fraudulently causes or suffers a decree or order to be executed against him after it has been satisfied, or 
for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A institutes a suit against Z. Z, knowing that A is likely to obtain a decree against him, fraudulently 
suffers a judgment to pass against him for a larger amount at the suit of B, who has no just claim against 
him, in order that B, either on his own account or for the benefit of Z, may share in the proceeds of any 
sale of Z's property which may be made under A's decree. Z has committed an offence under this section. 
209. Dishonesty making false claim in Court.—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent 
to injure or annoy any person, makes in a Court of Justice any claim which he knows to be false, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
210. Fraudulently obtaining decree for sum not due.—Whoever fraudulently obtains a decree or 
order against any person for a sum not due, or for a larger sum than is due or for any property or interest 
in property to which he is not entitled, or fraudulently causes a decree or order to be executed against any 
person after it has been satisfied or for anything in respect of which it has been satisfied, or fraudulently 
suffers or permits any such act to be done in his name, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure.—Whoever, with intent to cause injury to 
any person, institutes or causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely 
charges any person with having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for 
such proceeding or charge against that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; 
and if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge of an offence punishable with death, 
1[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment for seven years or upwards, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
212. Harbouring offender.—Whenever an offence has been committed, whoever harbours or 
conceals a person whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the offender, with the intention of 
screening him from legal punishment, 
if a capital offence.—shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.—and if the offence is punishable 
with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be 
liable to fine; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

54 
 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, and not to ten 
years, shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which 
may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, 
or with both.  
1[“Offence” in this section includes any act committed at any place out of 2[India], which, if 
committed in 3[India], would be punishable under any of the following sections, namely, 302, 304, 382, 
392, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397, 398, 399, 402, 435, 436, 449, 450, 457, 458, 459 and 460; and every such 
act shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been 
guilty of it in 3[India].] 
Exception.—This provision shall not extend to any case in which the harbour or concealment is by the 
husband or wife of the offender. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that B has committed dacoity, knowingly conceals B in order to screen him from legal punishment. Here, as B 
is liable to 3[imprisonment for life], A is liable to imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding three years, and is 
also liable to fine. 
213. Taking gift, etc., to screen an offender from punishment.—Whoever accepts or attempts to 
obtain, or agrees to accept, any gratification for himself or any other person, or any restitution of property 
to himself or any other person, in consideration of his concealing an offence or of his screening any 
person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any person for the purpose 
of bringing him to legal punishment, 
if a capital offence.—shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.—and if the offence is punishable 
with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be 
liable to fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one fourth part 
of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both. 
214. Offering gift or restoration of property in consideration of screening offender.—Whoever 
gives or causes, or offers or agrees to give or cause, any gratification to any person, or 4[restores or causes 
the restoration of] any property to any person, in consideration of that person's concealing an offence, or 
of his screening any person from legal punishment for any offence, or of his not proceeding against any 
person for the purpose of bringing him to legal punishment, 
if a capital offence.—shall, if the offence is punishable with death, be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.—and if the offence is punishable 
with 1[imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to 
fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment not extending to ten years, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term which may extend to one-fourth part 
of the longest term of imprisonment provided for the offence, or with fine, or with both. 
5[Exception.—The provisions of sections 213 and 214 do not extend to any case in which the offence 
may lawfully be compounded.] 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 7. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951 s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
4. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch., for “to restore or cause the restoration of”. 
5. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 6, for the original exception. 

55 
 
1*   
 
* 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
 
 
 * 
215. Taking gift to help to recover stolen property, etc.—Whoever takes or agrees or consents to 
take any gratification under pretence or on account of helping any person to recover any movable 
property of which he shall have been deprived by any offence punishable under this Code, shall, unless he 
uses all means in his power to cause the offender to be apprehended and convicted of the offence, be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
216. Harbouring offender who has escaped from custody or whose apprehension has been 
ordered.—Whenever any person convicted of a charged with an offence, being in lawful custody for that 
offence, escapes from such custody, 
or whenever a public servant, in the exercise of the lawful powers of such public servant, orders a certain 
person to be apprehended for an offence, whoever, knowing of such escape or order for apprehension, 
harbours or conceals that person with the intention of preventing him from being apprehended, shall be 
punished in the manner following, that is to say, 
if a capital offence.—if the offence for which the person was in custody or is ordered to be 
apprehended is punishable with death, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment.—if the offence is punishable 
with 2[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment for ten years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, with or without fine; 
and if the offence is punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year and not to ten 
years, he shall be punished with imprisonment of the description provided for the offence for a term 
which may extend to one-fourth part of the longest term of the imprisonment provided for such offence, 
or with fine, or with both. 
3[“Offence” in this section includes also any act or omission of which a person is alleged to have been 
guilty out of 4[India], which, if he had been guilty of it in 3[India], would have been punishable as an 
offence, and for which he is, under any law relating to extradition, 5*** or otherwise, liable to be 
apprehended or detained in custody in 3[India], and every such act or omission shall, for the purposes of 
this section, be deemed to be punishable as if the accused person had been guilty of it in 3[India].] 
Exception.—The provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour or concealment is by the 
husband or wife of the person to be apprehended. 
6[216A. Penalty for harbouring robbers or dacoits.—Whoever, knowing or having reason to 
believe that any persons are about to commit or have recently committed robbery or dacoity, harbours 
them or any of them, with the intention of facilitating the commission of such robbery or dacoity, or of 
screening them or any of them from punishment, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section it is immaterial whether the robbery or dacoity is 
intended to be committed, or has been committed, within or without 3[India]. 
Exception.—This provision does not extend to the case in which the harbour is by the husband or 
wife of the offender.] 
5[216B. Definition of “harbour” in sections 212, 216 and 216A.] Rep. by the Indian Penal Code 
(Amendment) Act, 1942 (8 of 1942), s. 3. 
217. Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person from punishment or 
property from forfeiture.—Whoever, being a public servant, knowingly disobeys any direction of the 
                                                          
1.  Illustrations rep. by Act 10 of 1882, s. 2 and the First Sch. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 23. 
4. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
5. The words “or under the Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881,” omitted by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch. 
6. Ins. by Act 3 of 1894, s. 8. 

56 
 
law as to the way in which he is to conduct himself as such public servant, intending thereby to save, or 
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or subject him to a 
less punishment than that to which he is liable, or with intent to save, or knowing that he is likely thereby 
to save, any property from forfeiture or any charge to which it is liable by law, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
218. Public servant framing incorrect record or writing with intent to save person from 
punishment or property from forfeiture.—Whoever, being a public servant, and being as such public 
servant, charged with the preparation of any record or other writing, frames that record or writing in a 
manner which he knows to be incorrect, with intent to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will 
thereby cause, loss or injury to the public or to any person, or with intent thereby to save, or knowing it to 
be likely that he will thereby save, any person from legal punishment, or with intent to save, or knowing 
that he is likely thereby to save, any property from forfeiture or other charge to which it is liable by law, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
219. Public servant in judicial proceeding corruptly making report, etc., contrary to law.—
Whoever, being a public servant, corruptly or maliciously makes or pronounces in any stage of a judicial 
proceeding, any report, order, verdict, or decision which he knows to be contrary to law, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
220. Commitment for trial or confinement by person having authority who knows that he is 
acting contrary to law.—Whoever, being in any office which gives him legal authority to commit 
persons for trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in confinement, corruptly or maliciously commits 
any person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person in confinement, in the exercise of that 
authority knowing that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
221. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to apprehend.—
Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as such public servant to apprehend or to keep in 
confinement any person charged with or liable to be apprehended for an offence, intentionally omits to 
apprehend such person, or intentionally suffers such person to escape, or intentionally aids such person in 
escaping or attempting to escape from such confinement, shall be punished as follows, that is to say:— 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to 
be apprehended for, an offence punishable with death; or  
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to 
be apprehended for, an offence punishable with 1[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten years; or 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been apprehended, was charged with, or liable to 
be apprehended for, an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term less than ten years. 
222. Intentional omission to apprehend on the part of public servant bound to apprehend 
person under sentence or lawfully committed.—Whoever, being a public servant, legally bound as 
such public servant to apprehend or to keep in confinement any person under sentence of a Court of 
Justice for any offence 2[or lawfully committed to custody], intentionally omits to apprehend such person, 
or intentionally suffers such person to escape or intentionally aids such person in escaping or attempting 
to escape from such confinement, shall be punished as follows, that is to say:— 
with 1[imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to fourteen years, with or without fine, if the person in confinement, or who ought to have been 
apprehended, is under sentence of death; or 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 8. 

57 
 
 with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, with or without 
fine, if the person in confinement or who ought to have been apprehended, is subject, by a sentence of a 
Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such sentence, to 1[imprisonment for life] 1*** 2*** 
3*** 4*** or imprisonment for a term of ten years, or upwards; or  
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or 
with both, if the person in confinement or who ought to have been apprehended is subject by a sentence  
of a Court of Justice, to imprisonment for a term not extending to ten years 2[or if the person was lawfully 
committed to custody]. 
223. Escape from confinement or custody negligently suffered by public servant.—Whoever, 
being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to keep in confinement any person charged 
with or convicted of any offence 5[or lawfully committed to custody], negligently suffers such person to 
escape from confinement, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
224. Resistance or obstruction by a person to his lawful apprehension.—Whoever intentionally 
offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of himself for any offence with 
which he is charged or of which he has been convicted, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody 
in which he is lawfully detained for any such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.—The punishment in this section is in addition to the punishment for which the person to 
be apprehended or detained in custody was liable for the offence with which he was charged, or of which 
he was convicted. 
225. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension of another person.—Whoever intentionally 
offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful apprehension of any other person for an offence, 
or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in which that person is lawfully 
detained for an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; 
or, if the person to be apprehended, or the person rescued or attempted to be rescued, is charged with 
or liable to be apprehended for an offence punishable with 6[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended, or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is charged with or liable to 
be apprehended for an offence punishable with death, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is liable under the sentence 
of a Court of Justice, or by virtue of a commutation of such a sentence, to 2[imprisonment for life], 7*** 
8*** 9*** or imprisonment, for a term of ten years, or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
or, if the person to be apprehended or rescued, or attempted to be rescued, is under sentence of death, 
shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment of either description for a term not 
exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
10[225A. Omission to apprehend, or sufferance of escape, on part of public servant, in cases not 
otherwise, provided for.—Whoever, being a public servant legally bound as such public servant to 
                                                          
1. The words “or penal servitude for life” omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-4-1949). 
2. The words “or to” omitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Sch. 
3. The word “transportation” omitted by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
4. The words “or penal servitude” omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-4-1949). 
5. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 8. 
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
7. The words “or to” omitted by Act 36 of 1957, s. 3 and the Second Sch. 
8. The word “transportation” omitted by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
9. The words “penal servitude” omitted by Act 17 of 1949, s. 2 (w.e.f. 6-4-1949). 
10. Subs. by Act 10 of 1886, s. 24(1), for section 225A which had been ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 9. 

58 
 
apprehend, or to keep in confinement, any person in any case not provided for in section 221, section 222 
or section 223, or in any other law for the time being in force, omits to apprehend that person or suffers 
him to escape from confinement, shall be punished— 
(a) if he does so intentionally, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine or with both; and 
(b) if he does so negligently, with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
225B. Resistance or obstruction to lawful apprehension, or escape or rescue in cases not 
otherwise provided for.—Whoever, in any case not provided for in section 224 or section 225 or in any 
other law for the time being in force, intentionally offers any resistance or illegal obstruction to the lawful 
apprehension of himself or of any other person, or escapes or attempts to escape from any custody in 
which he is lawfully detained, or rescues or attempts to rescue any other person from any custody in 
which that person is lawfully detained, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.] 
226. [Unlawful return from transportation.] Rep. by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) 
Act, 1955 (26 of 1955), s. 117 and the Sch (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
227. Violation of condition of remission of punishment.—Whoever, having accepted any 
conditional remission of punishment, knowingly violates any condition on which such remission was 
granted, shall be punished with the punishment to which he was originally sentenced, if he has already 
suffered no part of that punishment, and if he has suffered any part of that punishment, then with so much 
of that punishment as he has not already suffered. 
228. Intentional insult or interruption to public servant sitting in judicial proceeding.—Whoever 
intentionally offers any insult, or causes any interruption to any public servant, while such public servant 
is sitting in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
1[228A. Disclosure of identity of the victim of certain offences, etc.—(1) Whoever prints or 
publishes the name or any matter which may make known the identity of any person against whom an 
2[offence under section 376, 3[section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, 
section 376DA, section 376DB]  or section 376E] is alleged or found to have been committed (hereafter 
in this section referred to as the victim) shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) extends to any printing or publication of the name or any matter which 
may make known the identity of the victim if such printing or publication is— 
(a) by or under the order in writing of the officer-in-charge of the police station or the police 
officer making the investigation into such offence acting in good faith for the purposes of such 
investigation; or 
(b) by, or with the authorisation in writing of, the victim; or 
(c) where the victim is dead or minor or of unsound mind, by, or with the authorisation in writing 
of, the next of kin of the victim: 
Provided that no such authorisation shall be given by the next of kin to anybody other than the 
chairman or the secretary, by whatever name called, of any recognised welfare institution or organisation. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “recognised welfare institution or organisation” 
means a social welfare institution or organisationrecognised in this behalf by the Central or State 
Government. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 4, for “offence under section 376, section 376A, section 376B, section 376C or section 376D” 
(w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 3, for “section 376A, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).  

59 
 
(3) Whoever prints or publishes any matter in relation to any proceeding before a court with respect to 
an offence referred to in sub-section (1) without the previous permission of such court shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
Explanation.—The printing or publication of the judgment of any High Court or the Supreme Court 
does not amount to an offence within the meaning of this section.] 
229. Personation of a juror or assessor.—Whoever, by personation or otherwise, shall intentionally 
cause, or knowingly suffer himself to be returned, empanelled or sworn as a juryman or assessor in any 
case in which he knows that he is not entitled by law to be so returned, empanelled or sworn, or knowing 
himself to have been so returned, empanelled or sworn contrary to law, shall voluntarily serve on such 
jury or as such assessor, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
1[229A. Failure by person released on bail or bond to appear in court.—Whoever, having been 
charged with an offence and released on bail or on bond without sureties, fails without sufficient cause 
(the burden of proving which shall lie upon him), to appear in court in accordance with the terms of the 
bail or bond, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.—The punishment under this section is— 
(a) in addition to the punishment to which the offender would be liable on a conviction for the 
offence with which he has been charged; and 
(b) without prejudice to the power of the court to order forfeiture of the bond.] 
 
CHAPTER XII 
OF OFFENCES RELATINGTO COINAND GOVERNMENT STAMPS 
230. “Coin” defined.—2[Coin is metal used for the time being as money, and stamped and issued by 
the authority of some State or Sovereign Power in order to be so used.] 
3[Indian coin.—Indian coin is metal stamped and issued by the authority of the Government of India 
in order to be used as money; and metal which has been so stamped and issued shall continue to be Indian 
coin for the purposes of this Chapter, notwithstanding that it may have ceased to be used as money.] 
Illustrations 
(a) Cowries are not coin. 
(b) Lumps of unstamped copper, though used as money, are not coin. 
(c) Medals are not coin, inasmuch as they are not intended to be used as money. 
(d) The coin denominated as the Company's rupee is 4[Indian coin]. 
5[(e) The “Farukhabad rupee”, which was formerly used as money under the authority of the Government of India, is 
6[Indian coin] although it is no longer so used.] 
231. Counterfeiting coin.—Whoever counterfeits or knowingly performs any part of the process of 
counterfeiting coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—A person commits this offence who intending to practise deception, or knowing it to 
be likely that deception will thereby be practised, causes a genuine coin to appear like a different coin. 
232. Counterfeiting Indian coin.—Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part of the 
process of counterfeiting 4[Indian coin], shall be punished with 7[imprisonment for life], or with 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2005, s. 44 (w.e.f. 23-6-2005). 
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 1872, s. 1, for the first paragraph. 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for the second paragraph. 
4. Subs., ibid., for “the Queen’s coin”. 
5. Added by Act 6 of 1896, s. 1(2). 
6. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Queen’s coin” 
7. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

60 
 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
233. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting coin.—Whoever makes or mends, or 
performs any part of the process of making or mending, or buys, sells or disposes of, any die or 
instrument, for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be 
used, for the purpose of counterfeiting coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extended to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
234. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Indian coin.—Whoever makes or mends, or 
performs any part of the process of making or mending or buys, sells or disposes of, any die or 
instrument, for the purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be 
used, for the purpose of counterfeiting 1[Indian coin], shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
235. Possession of instrument or material for the purpose of using the same for counterfeiting 
coin.—Whoever is in possession of any instrument or material, for the purpose of using the same for 
counterfeiting coin, or knowing or having reason to believe that the same is intended to be used for that 
purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; 
if Indian coin.—and if the coin to be counterfeited is 1[Indian coin], shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
236. Abetting in India the counterfeiting out of India of coin.—Whoever, being within 2[India] 
abets the counterfeiting of coin out of 2[India] shall be punished in the same manner as if he abetted the 
counterfeiting of such coin within 2[India]. 
237. Import or export of counterfeit coin.—Whoever imports into 2[India], or exports therefrom, 
any counterfeit coin, knowing or having reason to believe that the same is counterfeit, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
238. Import or export of counterfeits of the Indian coin.—Whoever imports into 2[India], or 
exports therefrom, any counterfeit coin, which he knows or has reason to believe to be a counterfeit of 
1[Indian coin], shall be punished with 3[Imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
239. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit.—Whoever, having any 
counterfeit coin, which at the time when he became possessed of it, he knew to be counterfeit, 
fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers the same to any persons or attempts to 
induce any person to receive it, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
240. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is counterfeit.—Whoever, having 
any counterfeit coin which is a counterfeit of 1[Indian coin], and which, at the time when he became 
possessed of it, he knew to be a counterfeit of 1[Indian coin], fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be 
committed, delivers the same to any person, or attempts to induce any person to receive it, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
241. Delivery of coin as genuine, which, when first possessed, the deliverer did not know to be 
counterfeit.—Whoever delivers to any other person as genuine, or attempts to induce any other person to 
receive as genuine, any counterfeit coin which he knows to be counterfeit, but which he did not know to 
be counterfeit at the time when he took it into his possession, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine to an amount which may extend 
to ten times the value of the coin counterfeited, or with both. 
 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “the Queen’s coin”. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

61 
 
Illustration 
A, a coiner, delivers counterfeit Company's rupees to his accomplice B, for the purpose of uttering 
them. B sells the rupees to C, another utterer, who buys them knowing them to be counterfeit. C pays 
away the rupees for goods to D, who receives them, not knowing them to be counterfeit. D, after 
receiving the rupees, discovers that they are counterfeit and pays them away as if they were good. Here D 
is punishable only under this section, but B and C are punishable under section 239 or 240, as the case 
may be. 
242. Possession of counterfeit coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit when he became 
possessed thereof.—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession 
of counterfeit coin, having known at the time when he became possessed thereof that such coin was 
counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
243. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be counterfeit when he became 
possessed thereof.—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession 
of counterfeit coin, which is a counterfeit of 1[Indian coin], having known at the time when he became 
possessed of it that it was counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
244. Person employed in mint causing coin to be of different weight or composition from that 
fixed by law.—Whoever, being employed in any mint lawfully established in 2[India], does any act, or 
omits what he is legally bound to do, with the intention of causing any coin issued from that mint to be of 
a different weight or composition from the weight or composition fixed by law, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
245. Unlawfully taking coining instrument from mint.—Whoever, without lawful authority, takes 
out of any mint, lawfully established in 2[India], any coining tool or instrument, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
246. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition of coin.—Whoever, 
fraudulently or dishonestly performs on any coin any operation which diminishes the weight or alters the 
composition of that coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—A person who scoops out part of the coin and puts anything else into the cavity alters 
the composition of the coin. 
247. Fraudulently or dishonestly diminishing weight or altering composition of Indian coin.—
Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly performs on 3[any Indian coin] any operation which diminishes the 
weight or alters the composition of that coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
248. Altering appearance of coin with intent that it shall pass as coin of different description.—
Whoever performs on any coin any operation which alters the appearance of that coin, with the intention 
that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a different description, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “the Queen’s coin”. 
2. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “any of the Queen’s coin”. 

62 
 
249. Altering appearance of Indian coin with intent that it shall pass as coin of different 
description.—Whoever performs on 1[any Indian coin] any operation which alters the appearance of that 
coin, with the intention that the said coin shall pass as a coin of a different description, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
250. Delivery of coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered.—Whoever, having coin in his 
possession with respect to which the offence defined in section 246 or 248 has been committed, and 
having known at the time when he became possessed of such coin that such offence had been committed 
with respect to it, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers such coin to any other 
person, or attempts to induce any other person to receive the same, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
251. Delivery of Indian coin, possessed with knowledge that it is altered.—Whoever, having coin 
in his possession with respect to which the offence defined in section 247 or 249 has been committed, and 
having known at the time when he became possessed of such coin that such offence had been committed 
with respect to it, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, delivers such coin to any other 
person, or attempts to induce any other person to receive the same, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
252. Possession of coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof.—Whoever fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession of coin with 
respect to which the offence defined in either of the section 246 or 248 has been committed, having 
known at the time of becoming possessed thereof that such offence had been committed with respect to 
such coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
253. Possession of Indian coin by person who knew it to be altered when he became possessed 
thereof.—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent that fraud may be committed, is in possession of coin 
with respect to which the offence defined in either of the section 247 or 249 has been committed having 
known at the time of becoming possessed thereof, that such offence had been committed with respect to 
such coin, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
254. Delivery of coin as genuine which, when first possessed, the deliverer did not know to be 
altered.—Whoever delivers to any other person as genuine or as a coin of a different description from 
what it is, or attempts to induce any person to receive as genuine, or as a different coin from what it is, 
any coin in respect of which he knows that any such operation as that mentioned in sections 246, 247, 248 
or 249 has been performed, but in respect of which he did not, at the time when he took it into his 
possession, know that such operation had been performed, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine to an amount which may extend to ten 
times the value of the coin for which the altered coin is passed, or attempted to be passed. 
255. Counterfeiting Government stamp.—Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly performs any part 
of the process of counterfeiting, any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue shall be 
punished with 2[imprisonment for life] or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—A person commits this offence who counterfeits by causing a genuine stamps of one 
denomination to appear like a genuine stamp of a different denomination. 
256. Having possession of instrument or material for counterfeiting Government stamp.—
Whoever has in his possession any instrument or material for the purpose of being used, or knowing or 
having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued 
by Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “any of the Queen’s coin”. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
 

63 
 
257. Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp.—Whoever makes or 
performs any part of the process of making, or buys, or sells, or disposes or, any instrument for the 
purpose of being used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for the 
purpose of counterfeiting any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
258. Sale of counterfeit Government stamp.—Whoever sells, or offers for sale, any stamp which he 
knows or has reason to believe to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of 
revenue, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
259. Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp.—Whoever has in his possession any 
stamp which he knows to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, 
intending to use, or dispose of the same as a genuine stamp, or in order that it may be used as a genuine 
stamp, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
260. Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be counterfeit.—Whoever uses as genuine 
any stamp, knowing it to be a counterfeit of any stamp issued by Government for the purpose of revenue, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
261. Effacing writing from substance bearing Government stamp, or removing from document 
a stamp used for it, with intent to cause loss to Government.—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent to 
cause loss to the Government, removes or effaces from any substance, bearing any stamp issued by 
Government for the purpose of revenue, any writing or document for which such stamp has been used, or 
removes from any writing or document a stamp which has been used for such writing or document, in 
order that such stamp may be used for a different writing or document, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
262. Using Government stamp known to have been before used.—Whoever, fraudulently or with 
intent to cause loss to the Government, uses for any purpose a stamp issued by Government for the 
purpose of revenue, which he knows to have been before used, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
263. Erasure of mark denoting that stamp has been used.—Whoever, fraudulently or with intent 
to cause loss to Government, erases or removes from a stamp issued by Government for the purpose of 
revenue, any mark, put or impressed upon such stamp for the purpose of denoting that the same has been 
used, or knowingly has in his possession or sells or disposes of any such stamp from which such mark has 
been erased or removed, or sells or disposes of any such stamp which he knows to have been used, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
1[263A. Prohibition of fictitious stamps.—(1) Whoever— 
(a) makes, knowingly utters, deals in or sells any fictitious stamp, or knowingly uses for any 
postal purpose any fictitious stamp, or 
(b) has in his possession, without lawful excuse, any fictitious stamp, or 
(c) makes or, without lawful excuse, has in his possession any die, plate, instrument or materials 
for making any fictitious stamp,  
shall be punished with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(2) Any such stamp, die, plate, instrument or materials in the possession of any person for making any 
fictitious stamp 2[may be seized and, if seized] shall be forfeited. 
(3) In this section “fictitious stamp” means any stamp falsely purporting to be issued by Government 
for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, or any facsimile or imitation or representation, whether on 
paper or otherwise, of any stamp issued by Government for that purpose. 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 3 of 1895, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch., for “may be seized and”. 

64 
 
(4) In this section and also in sections 255 to 263, both inclusive, the word “Government”, when used 
in connection with, or in reference to any stamp issued for the purpose of denoting a rate of postage, shall, 
notwithstanding anything in section 17, be deemed to include the person or persons authorized by law to 
administer executive government in any part of India, and also in any part of Her Majesty's dominions or 
in any foreign country. 
CHAPTER XIII 
OF OFFENCESRELATINGTO WEIGHTSAND MEASURES 
264. Fraudulent use of false instrument for weighing.—Whoever, fraudulently uses any instrument 
for weighing which he knows to be false, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
265. Fraudulent use of false weight or measure.—Whoever, fraudulently uses any false weight or 
false measure of length or capacity, or fraudulently uses any weight or any measure of length or capacity 
as a different weight or measure from what it is, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
266. Being in possession of false weight or measure.—Whoever is in possession of any instrument 
for  weighing, or of any  weight, or of any measure  of length or  capacity, which he   knows to be false, 
1*** intending that the same may be fraudulently used, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
267. Making or selling false weight or measure.—Whoever makes, sells or disposes of any 
instrument for weighing, or any weight, or any measure of length or capacity which he knows to be false, 
in order that the same may be used as true, or knowing that the same is likely to be used as true, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, 
or with both. 
CHAPTER XIV 
OF OFFENCESAFFECTINGTHE PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, CONVENIENCE, DECENCYAND MORALS 
268. Public nuisance.—A person is guilty of a public nuisance who does any act or is guilty of an 
illegal omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in 
general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must necessarily cause injury, obstruction, 
danger or annoyance to persons who may have occasion to use any public right. 
A common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes some convenience or advantage. 
269. Negligent act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.—Whoever unlawfully or 
negligently does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason to believe to be, likely to spread the 
infection of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 
270. Malignant act likely to spread infection of disease dangerous to life.—Whoever malignantly 
does any act which is, and which he knows or has reason the believe to be, likely to spread the infection 
of any disease dangerous to life, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
271. Disobedience to quarantine rule.—Whoever knowingly disobeys any rule made and 
promulgated 2[by the 3*** Government 4***] for putting any vessel into a state of quarantine, or for 
regulating the intercourse of vessels in a state of quarantine with the shore or with other vessels, for 
regulating the intercourse between places where an infectious disease prevails and other places, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine, or with both. 
272. Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale.—Whoever adulterates any article of food or 
drink, so as to make such article noxious as food or drink, intending to sell such article as food or drink, 
                                                          
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 42 of 1953, s. 4 and the Third Sch. 
2. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “by the G. of I., or by any Government”. 
3. The words “Central or any Provincial” omitted by the A. O. 1950. 
4. The words “or the Crown Representative” omitted by the A. O. 1948. 

65 
 
or knowing it to be likely that the same will be sold as food or drink, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
273. Sale of noxious food or drink.—Whoever sells, or offers or exposes for sale, as food or drink, 
any article which has been rendered or has become noxious, or is in a state unfit for food or drink, 
knowing or having reason to believe that the same is noxious as food or drink, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
274. Adulteration of drugs.—Whoever adulterates any drug or medical preparation in such a manner 
as to lessen the efficacy or change the operation of such drug or medical preparation, or to make it 
noxious, intending that it shall be sold or used for, or knowing it to be likely that it will be sold or used 
for, any medicinal purpose, as if it had not undergone such adulteration, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
275. Sale of adulterated drugs.—Whoever, knowing any drug or medical preparation to have been 
adulterated in such a manner as to lessen its efficacy, to change its operation, or to render it noxious, sells 
the same, or offers or exposes it for sale, or issues it from any dispensary for medicinal purposes as 
unadulterated, or causes it to be used for medicinal purposes by any person not knowing of the 
adulteration, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
276. Sale of drug as a different drug or preparation.—Whoever knowingly sells, or offers or 
exposes for sale, or issues from a dispensary for medicinal purposes, any drug or medical preparation, as a 
different drug or medical preparation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
277. Fouling water of public spring or reservoir.—Whoever voluntarily corrupts or fouls the water 
of any public spring or reservoir, so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which it is ordinarily used, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
278. Making atmosphere noxious to health.—Whoever voluntarily vitiates the atmosphere in any 
place so as to make it noxious to the health of persons in general dwelling or carrying on business in the 
neighbourhood or passing along a public way, shall be punished with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees. 
279. Rash driving or riding on a public way.—Whoever drives any vehicle, or rides, on any public 
way in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to 
any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
280. Rash navigation of vessel.—Whoever navigates any vessel in a manner so rash or negligent as 
to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other person, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
281. Exhibition of false light, mark or buoy.—Whoever exhibits any false light, mark or buoy, 
intending or knowing it to be likely that such exhibition will mislead any navigator, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with 
both.  
282. Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded vessel.—Whoever knowingly or 
negligently conveys, or causes to be conveyed for hire, any person by water in any vessel, when that 
vessel is in such a state or so loaded as to endanger the life of that person, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 

66 
 
283. Danger or obstruction in public way or line of navigation.—Whoever, by doing any act, or 
by omitting to take order with any property in his possession or under his charge, causes danger, 
obstruction or injury to any person in any public way or public line of navigation, shall be punished, with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
 284. Negligent conduct with respect to poisonous substance.—Whoever does, with any poisonous 
substance, any act in a manner so rash or negligent as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt 
or injury to any person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any poisonous substance in his possession 
as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such poisonous substance, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
285. Negligent conduct with respect to fire or combustible matter.—Whoever does, with fire or 
any combustible matter, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to 
cause hurt or injury to any other person, or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any 
fire or any combustible matter in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to 
human life from such fire or combustible matter, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
286. Negligent conduct with respect to explosive substance.—Whoever does, with any explosive 
substance, any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or to be likely to cause hurt or 
injury to any other person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any explosive substance in his possession 
as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from that substance, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
287. Negligent conduct with respect to machinery.—Whoever does, with any machinery, any act 
so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life or to be likely to cause hurt or injury to any other 
person, 
or knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with any machinery in his possession or under 
his care as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from such machinery, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
288. Negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing buildings.—Whoever, in 
pulling down or repairing any building, knowingly or negligently omits to take such order with that 
building as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to human life from the fall of that building, 
or of any part thereof, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
289. Negligent conduct with respect to animal.—Whoever knowingly or negligently omits to take 
such order with any animal in his possession as is sufficient to guard against any probable danger to 
human life, or any probable danger of grievous hurt from such animal, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
290. Punishment for public nuisance in cases not otherwise provided for.—Whoever commits a 
public nuisance in any case not otherwise punishable by this Code, shall be punished with fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees. 
291. Continuance of nuisance after injunction to discontinue.—Whoever repeats or continues a 
public nuisance, having been enjoined by any public servant who has lawful authority to issue such 
injunction not to repeat or continue such nuisance, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. 

67 
 
1[292. Sale, etc., of obscene books, etc.—2[(1) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a book, pamphlet, 
paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation, figure or any other object, shall be deemed to be 
obscene if it is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect, or (where it comprises two or 
more distinct items) the effect of any one of its items, is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave 
and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the 
matter contained or embodied in it.] 
3[(2)] Whoever— 
(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicity exhibits or in any manner puts into circulation, or for 
purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public exhibition or circulation, makes, produces or has in his 
possession any obscene book, pamphlet, paper, drawing, painting, representation or figure or any 
other obscene object whatsoever, or 
(b) imports, exports or conveys any obscene object for any of the purposes aforesaid, or knowing 
or having reason to believe that such object will be sold, let to hire, distributed or publicly exhibited 
or in any manner put into circulation, or 
(c) takes part in or receives profits from any business in the course of which he knows or has 
reason to believe that any such obscene objects are, for any of the purposes aforesaid, made, 
produced, purchased, kept, imported, exported, conveyed, publicly exhibited or in any manner put 
into circulation, or 
(d) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person is engaged or is ready to 
engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that any such obscene object can be 
procured from or through any person, or 
(e) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section, 
shall be punished 4[on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, and with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a 
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
five years, and also with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees]. 
5[Exception.—This section does not extend to— 
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure— 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the 
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure is in 
the interest of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern, or 
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes; 
(b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented on or in— 
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological 
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958), or  
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any 
religious purpose.]] 
6[293. Sale, etc., of obscene objects to young person.—Whoever sells, lets to hire, distributes, 
exhibits or circulates to any person under the age of twenty years any such obscene object as is referred to 
in the last preceding section, or offers or attempts so to do, shall be punished 1[on first conviction with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, and, in the event of a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and also with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees].] 
 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 8 of 1925, s. 2, for s. 292. 
2. Ins. by Act 36 of 1969, s. 2. 
3. S. 292 renumbered as sub-section (2) thereof by s. 2, ibid. 
4. Subs. s. 2, ibid., for certain words. 
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for Exception. 
6. Subs. by Act 8 of 1925, s. 2, for section 293. 

68 
 
1[294. Obscene acts and songs.—Whoever, to the annoyance of others, 
(a) does any obscene act in any public place, or 
(b) sings, recites or utters any obscene song, ballad or words, in or near any public place, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine, or with both.] 
2[294A. Keeping lottery office.—Whoever keeps any office or place for the purpose of drawing any 
lottery 3[not being 4[a State lottery] or a lottery authorised by the 5[State] Government], shall be punished 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine, or with both. 
And whoever publishes any proposal to pay any sum, or to deliver any goods, or to do or forbear 
doing anything for the benefit of any person, on any event or contingency relative or applicable to the 
drawing of any ticket, lot, number or figure in any such lottery, shall be punished with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees.] 
CHAPTER XV 
OF OFFENCESRELATING TO RELIGION 
295. Injuring or defiling place of worship, with intent to insult the religion of any class.—
Whoever destroys, damages or defiles any place of worship, or any object held sacred by any class of 
persons with the intention of thereby insulting the religion of any class of persons or with the knowledge 
that any class of persons is likely to consider such destruction, damage or defilement as an insult to their 
religion, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
6[295A. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage religious feelings of any class by 
insulting its religion or religious beliefs.—Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of 
outraging the religious feelings of any class of 7[citizens of India], 8[by words, either spoken or written, or 
or by signs or by visible representations or otherwise], insults or attempts to insult the religion or the 
religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to 9[three years], or with fine, or with both.] 
296. Disturbing religious assembly.—Whoever voluntarily causes disturbance to any assembly 
lawfully engaged in the performance of religious worship, or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
297. Trespassing on burial places, etc.—Whoever, with the intention of wounding the feelings of 
any person, or of insulting the religion of any person or with the knowledge that the feelings of any 
person are likely to be wounded, or that the religion of any person is likely to be insulted thereby, 
commits any trespass in any place of worship or on any place of sepulture, or any place set apart for 
the performance of funeral rites or as a depository for the remains of the dead, or offers any indignity to 
any human corpse, or causes disturbance to any persons assembled for the performance of funeral 
ceremonies, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or 
with fine, or with both.  
298. Uttering words, etc., with deliberate intent to wound religious feelings.—Whoever, with the 
deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any person, utters any word or makes any sound 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 1895, s. 3, for section 294. 
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 10. 
3. Subs. by the A. O. 1937, for “not authorized by Government”. 
4. Subs. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., for “a lottery organized by the Central Government or the Government of a Part A 
State or a Part B State”. 
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “Provincial”. 
6. Ins. by Act 25 of 1927, s. 2. 
7. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “His Majesty’s subjects”. 
8. Subs. by Act 41 of 1961, s. 3, for certain words. 
9. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “two years”. 

69 
 
in the hearing of that person or makes any gesture in the sight of that persons or places any object in the 
sight of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XVI 
OF OFFENCESAFFECTINGTHE HUMAN BODY 
Of offences affecting life 
299. Culpable homicide.—Whoever causes death by doing an act with the intention of causing 
death, or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, or with the 
knowledge that he is likely by such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable homicide. 
Illustrations 
(a) A lays sticks and turf over a pit, with the intention of thereby causing death, or with the knowledge that death is likely to 
be thereby caused. Z, believing the ground to be firm, treads on it, falls in and is killed. A has committed the offence of culpable 
homicide. 
(b) A knows Z to be behind a bush. B does not know it. A, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely to cause Z's death, 
induces B to fire at the bush. B fires and kills Z. Here B may be guilty of no offence; but A has committed the offence of culpable 
homicide. 
(c) A, by shooting at a fowl with intent to kill and steal it, kills B, who is behind a bush; A not knowing that he was there. 
Here, although A was doing an unlawful act, he was not guilty of culpable homicide, as he did not intend to kill B, or to cause 
death by doing an act that he knew was likely to cause death. 
Explanation 1.—A person who causes bodily injury to another who is labouring under a disorder, 
disease or bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of that other, shall be deemed to have caused 
his death. 
Explanation 2.—Where death is caused by bodily injury, the person who causes such bodily injury 
shall be deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting to proper remedies and skilful treatment 
the death might have been prevented. 
Explanation 3.—The causing of the death of a child in the mother's womb is not homicide. But it may 
amount to culpable homicide to cause the death of a living child, if any part of that child has been brought 
forth, though the child may not have breathed or been completely born. 
300. Murder.—Except in the cases hereinafter excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by 
which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or— 
2ndly.—If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be 
likely to cause the death of the person to whom the harm is caused, or— 
3rdly.—If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury to any person and the bodily injury 
intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or— 
4thly.—If the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all 
probability, cause death, or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and commits such act without 
any excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injury as aforesaid. 
Illustrations 
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in consequence. A commits murder. 
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a blow is likely to cause his death, strikes him with the intention 
of causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of the blow. A is guilty of murder, although the blow might not have been 
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death of a person in a sound state of health. But if A, not knowing that Z is 
labouring under any disease, gives him such a blow as would not in the ordinary course of nature kill a person in a sound state of 
health, here A, although he may intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did not intend to cause death, or such 
bodily injury as in the ordinary course of nature would cause death. 
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound sufficient to cause the death of a man in the ordinary course of nature. 
Z dies in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder, although he may not have intended to cause Z's death. 
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd of persons and kills one of them. A is guilty of murder, 
although he may not have had a premeditated design to kill any particular individual. 

70 
 
Exception 1.—When culpable homicide is not murder.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the 
offender, whilst deprived of the power of self-control by grave and sudden provocation, causes the death 
of the person who gave the provocation or causes the death of any other person by mistake or accident. 
The above exception is subject to the following provisos:— 
First.—That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for 
killing or doing harm to any person. 
Secondly.—That the provocation is not given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public 
servant in the lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant. 
Thirdly.—That the provocation is not given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of 
private defence. 
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to prevent the offence from 
amounting to murder is a question of fact. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation given by Z, intentionally kills Y, Z's child. This is murder, 
inasmuch as the provocation was not given by the child, and the death of the child was not caused by accident or misfortune in 
doing an act caused by the provocation. 
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this provocation, fires a pistol at Y, neither intending nor knowing 
himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight. A kills Z. Here A has not committed murder, but merely culpable 
homicide. 
(c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden and violent passion by the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder, 
inasmuch as the provocation was given by a thing done by a public servant in the exercise of his powers. 
(d) A appears as a witness before Z, a Magistrate. Z says that he does not believe a word of A's deposition, and that A has 
perjured himself. A is moved to sudden passion by these words, and kills Z. This is murder. 
(e)A attempts to pull Z's nose. Z, in the exercise of the right of private defence, lays hold of A to prevent him from doing so. 
A is moved to sudden and violent passion in consequence, and kills Z. This is murder, inasmuch as the provocation was giving by 
a thing done in the exercise of the right of private defence. 
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent rage. A, a bystander, intending to take advantage of B's rage, and 
to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife into B's hand for that purpose. B kills Z with the knife. Here B may have committed only 
culpable homicide, but A is guilty of murder. 
Exception 2.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender in the exercise in good faith of the 
right of private defence of person or property, exceeds the power given to him by law and causes the 
death of the person against whom he is exercising such right of defence without premeditation, and 
without any intention of doing more harm than is necessary for the purpose of such defence. 
Illustration 
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause grievous hurt to A. A draws out a pistol. Z persists in the 
assault. A believing in good faith that he can by no other means prevent himself from being horsewhipped, shoots Z dead. A has 
not committed murder, but only culpable homicide. 
Exception 3.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender, being a public servant or aiding a 
public servant acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the powers given to him by law, and 
causes death by doing an act which he, in good faith, believes to be lawful and necessary for the due 
discharge of his duty as such public servant and without ill-will towards the person whose death is 
caused. 
Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without premeditation in a sudden 
fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender's having taken undue 
advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. 
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or commits the first 
assault. 
Exception 5.—Culpable homicide is not murder when the person whose death is caused, being above 
the age of eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of death with his own consent. 
 
 

71 
 
Illustration 
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a person under eighteen years of age to commit suicide. Here, on account of Z's 
youth, he was incapable of giving consent to his own death; A has therefore abetted murder. 
301. Culpable homicide by causing death of person other than person whose death was 
intended.—If a person, by doing anything which he intends or knows to be likely to cause death, 
commits culpable homicide by causing the death of any person, whose death he neither intends nor knows 
himself to be likely to cause, the culpable homicide committed by the offender is of the description of 
which it would have been if he had caused the death of the person whose death he intended or knew 
himself to he likely to cause. 
302. Punishment for murder.—Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death or 
1[imprisonment for life], and shall also be liable to fine. 
303. Punishment for murder by life-convict.—Whoever, being under sentence of 1[imprisonment 
for life], commits murder, shall be punished with death. 
304. Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder.—Whoever commits culpable 
homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by 
which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or of causing such bodily injury as 
is likely to cause death; 
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or 
with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death, but without any intention 
to cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. 
2[304A. Causing death by negligence.—Whoever causes the death of any person by doing any rash 
or negligent act not amounting to culpable homicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.] 
3[304B. Dowry death.—(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or 
occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that 
soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her 
husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called “dowry death”, and 
such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “dowry” shall have the same meaning as in 
section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961). 
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for life.] 
305. Abetment of suicide of child or insane person.—If any person under eighteen years of age, 
any insane person, any delirious person, any idiot, or any person in a state of intoxication, commits 
suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide, shall be punished with death or 1[imprisonment 
for life], or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
306. Abetment of suicide.—If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission of such 
suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
307. Attempt to murder.—Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such 
circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine; and if hurt is caused to any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to 1[imprisonment 
for life], or to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 1870, s. 12. 
3. Ins. by Act 43 of 1986, s. 10 (w.e.f. 19-11-1986). 

72 
 
Attempts by life-convicts.—1[When any person offending under this section is under sentence of 
1[imprisonment for life], he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A shoots at Z with intention to kill him, under such circumstances that, if death ensued A would be guilty of murder. A is 
liable to punishment under this section. 
(b) A, with the intention of causing the death of a child of tender years, exposes it in a desert place A has committed the 
offence defined by this section, though the death of the child does not ensue. 
(c) A, intending to murder Z, buys a gun and loads it. A has not yet committed the offence. A fires the gun at Z. He has 
committed the offence defined in this section, and, if by such firing he wounds Z, he is liable to the punishment provided by the  
 latter part of 2[the first paragraph of] this section. 
(d) A, intending to murder Z by poison, purchases poison and mixes the same with food which remains in A's keeping; A 
has not yet committed the offence defined in this section. A places the food on Z's table or delivers it to Z's servants to place it on 
Z's table. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
 308. Attempt to commit culpable homicide.—Whoever does any act with such intention or 
knowledge and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both; and, if hurt is caused to any person 
by such act, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustration 
A, on grave and sudden provocation, fires a pistol at Z, under such circumstances that if he there by caused death he would 
be guilty of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
309. Attempt to commit suicide.—Whoever attempts to commit suicide and does any act towards 
the commission of such offence, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year 3[or with fine, or with both.] 
310. Thug.—Whoever, at any time after the passing of this Act, shall have been habitually associated 
with any other or others for the purpose of committing robbery or child-stealing by means of or 
accompanied with murder, is a thug. 
311. Punishment.—Whoever is a thug, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Of the causing of miscarriage, of injuries to unborn children, of the exposure  
Of infants, and of the concealment of births. 
312. Causing miscarraige.—Whoever voluntarily causes a woman with child to miscarry, shall, if 
such miscarriage be not caused in good faith for the purpose of saving the life of the woman, be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both; and, if the woman be quick with child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—A woman who causes herself to miscarry, is within the meaning of this section.  
313. Causing miscarriage without woman's consent.—Whoever commits the offence defined in 
the last preceding section without the consent of the woman, whether the woman is quick with child or 
not, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
314. Death caused by act done with intent to cause miscarriage.—Whoever, with intent to cause 
the miscarriage of a woman with child, does any act which causes the death of such woman, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine; 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 27 of 1870, s. 11. 
2. Ins. by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the Second Sch. 
3. Subs. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 7, for “and shall also be liable to fine”. 
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
 

73 
 
if act done without woman's consent.—and if the act is done without the consent of the woman, 
shall be punished either with 1[imprisonment for life], or with the punishment above mentioned. 
Explanation.—It is not essential to this offence that the offender should know that the act is likely to 
cause death. 
315. Act done with intent to prevent child being born alive or to cause it to die after birth.—
Whoever before the birth of any child does any act with the intention of thereby preventing that child 
from being born alive or causing it to die after its birth, and does by such act prevent that child from being 
born alive, or causes it to die after its birth, shall, if such act be not caused in good faith for the purpose of 
saving the life of the mother, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, or with fine, or with both. 
316. Causing death of quick unborn child by act amounting to culpable homicide.—Whoever 
does any act under such circumstances, that if he thereby caused death he would be guilty of culpable 
homicide, and does by such act cause the death of a quick unborn child, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
Illustration 
A, knowing that he is likely to cause the death of a pregnant woman, does an act which, if it caused the death of the woman, 
would amount to culpable homicide. The woman is injured, but does not die; but the death of an unborn quick child with which 
she is pregnant is thereby caused. A is guilty of the offence defined in this section. 
317. Exposure and abandonment of child under twelve years, by parent or person having care 
of it.—Whoever being the father or mother of a child under the age of twelve years, or having the care of 
such child, shall expose or leave such child in any place with the intention of wholly abandoning such 
child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
Explanation.—This section is not intended to prevent the trial of the offender for murder or culpable 
homicide, as the case may be, if the child die in consequence of the exposure. 
318. Concealment of birth by secret disposal of dead body.—Whoever, by secretly burying or 
otherwise disposing of the dead body of a child whether such child die before or after or during its birth, 
intentionally conceals or endeavors to conceal the birth of such child, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Of Hurt 
319. Hurt.—Whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause hurt. 
320. Grievous hurt.—The following kinds of hurt only are designated as “grievous”:— 
First.—Emasculation. 
Secondly.—Permanent privation of the sight of either eye. 
Thirdly.—Permanent privation of the hearing of either ear. 
Fourthly.—Privation of any member or joint. 
Fifthly.—Destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint. 
Sixthly.—Permanent disfiguration of the head or face. 
Seventhly.—Fracture or dislocation of a bone or tooth. 
Eighthly.—Any hurt which endangers life or which causes the sufferer to be during the space of 
twenty days in severe bodily pain, or unable to follow his ordinary pursuits. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
 
 

74 
 
321. Voluntarily causing hurt.—Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to 
any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does thereby 
cause hurt to any person, is said “voluntarily to cause hurt”.  
322. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt.—Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, if the hurt which he 
intends to cause or knows himself to be likely to cause is grievous hurt, and if the hurt which he causes is 
grievous hurt, is said “voluntarily to cause grievous hurt”. 
Explanation.—A person is not said voluntarily to cause grievous hurt except when he both causes 
grievous hurt and intends or knows himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt. But he is said voluntarily 
to cause grievous hurt, if intending or knowing himself to be likely to cause grievous hurt of one kind, he 
actually causes grievous hurt of another kind. 
Illustration 
A, intending of knowing himself to be likely permanently to disfigure Z's face, gives Z a blow which does not permanently 
disfigure Z's face, but which causes Z to suffer severe bodily pain for the space of twenty days. A has voluntarily caused grievous 
hurt. 
323. Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt.—Whoever, except in the case provided for by 
section 334, voluntarily causes hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
324. Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means.—Whoever, except in the case 
provided for by section 334, voluntarily causes hurt by means of any instrument for shooting, stabbing or 
cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause death, or by means of fire 
or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, or by means of any 
explosive substance or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the human body to inhale, to 
swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
325. Punishment for voluntarily causing grievous hurt.—Whoever, except in the case provided for 
by section 335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
326. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapons or means.—Whoever, except in 
the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt by means of any instrument for 
shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause 
death, or by means of fire or any heated substance, or by means of any poison or any corrosive substance, 
or by means of any explosive substance, or by means of any substance which it is deleterious to the 
human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be 
punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
2[326A. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by use of acid, etc.—Whoever causes permanent or 
partial damage or deformity to, or burns or maims or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body 
of a person or causes grievous hurt by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, or by 
using any other means with the intention of causing or with the knowledge that he is likely to cause such 
injury or hurt, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less 
than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and with fine: 
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses of the treatment of 
the victim: 
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim. 
326B. Voluntarily throwing or attempting to throw acid.—Whoever throws or attempts to throw 
acid on any person or attempts to administer acid to any person, or attempts to use any other means, with 
the intention of causing permanent or partial damage or deformity or burns or maiming or disfigurement 
or disability or grievous hurt to that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 5 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 

75 
 
a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of section 326A and this section, "acid" includes any substance 
which has acidic or corrosive character or burning nature, that is capable of causing bodily injury leading 
to scars or disfigurement or temporary or permanent disability. 
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of section 326A and this section, permanent or partial damage or 
deformity shall not be required to be irreversible.] 
327. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal to an act.—
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer, or from any person 
interested in the sufferer, any property or valuable security, or of constraining the sufferer or any person 
interested in such sufferer to do anything which is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of an 
offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
328. Causing hurt by means of poison, etc., with intent to commit and offence.—Whoever 
administers to or causes to be taken by any person any poison or any stupefying, intoxicating or 
unwholesome drug, or other thing with intent to cause hurt to such person, or with intent to commit or to 
facilitate the commission of an offence or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause hurt, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine.  
329. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act.—
Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from any 
person interested in the sufferer any property or valuable security, or of constraining the sufferer or any 
person interested in such sufferer to do anything that is illegal or which may facilitate the commission of 
an offence, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
330. Voluntarily causing hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of property.—
Whoever voluntarily causes hurt, for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or from any person 
interested in the sufferer, any confession or any information which may lead to the detection of an offence 
or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the sufferer or any person interested in the sufferer to 
restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security or to satisfy any claim or demand, 
or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable security, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a police-officer, tortures Z in order to induce Z to confess that he committed a crime. A is guilty of an offence under 
this section. 
(b) A, a police-officer, tortures B to induce him to point out where certain stolen property is deposited. A is guilty of an 
offence under this section. 
(c) A, a revenue officer, tortures z in order to compel him to pay certain arrears of revenue due from Z. A is guilty of an 
offence under this section. 
(d) A, a zamindar, tortures a raiyat in order to compel him to pay his rent. A is guilty of an offence under this section. 
331. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort confession, or to compel restoration of 
property.—Whoever voluntarily causes grievous hurt for the purpose of extorting from the sufferer or 
from any person interested in the sufferer any confession or any information which may lead to the 
detection of an offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the sufferer or any person 
interested in the sufferer to restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security, or to 
satisfy any claim or demand or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or 
valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

76 
 
332. Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty.—Whoever voluntarily causes 
hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge of his duty as such public servant, or with intent 
to prevent or deter that person or any other public servant from discharging his duty as such public 
servant or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that person in the lawful discharge 
of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
333. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to deter public servant from his duty.—Whoever 
voluntarily causes grievous hurt to any person being a public servant in the discharge of his duty as such 
public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person or any other public servant from discharging 
his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by that 
person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
334. Voluntarily causing hurt on provocation.—Whoever voluntarily causes hurt on grave and 
sudden provocation, if he neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause hurt to any person other 
than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
335. Voluntarily causing grievous hurt on provocation.—Whoever 1[voluntarily] causes grievous 
hurt on grave and sudden provocation, if he neither intends nor knows himself to be likely to cause 
grievous hurt to any person other than the person who gave the provocation, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to four years, or with fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.  
Explanation.—The last two sections are subject to the same provisos as Exception 1, section 300. 
336. Act endangering life or personal safety of others.—Whoever does any act so rashly or 
negligently as to endanger human life or the personal safety of others, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both. 
337. Causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others.—Whoever causes hurt to 
any person by doing any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or the personal safety of 
others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
338. Causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others.—Whoever 
causes grievous hurt to any person by doing any act so rashly or negligently as to endanger human life, or 
the personal safety of others, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
Of wrongful restraint and wrongful confinement 
339. Wrongful restraint.—Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person 
from proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to restrain 
that person. 
Exception.—The obstruction of a private way over land or water which a person in good faith 
believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence within the meaning of this section. 
Illustration 
A obstructs a path along which Z has a right to pass, A not believing in good faith that he has a right to stop the path. Z is 
thereby prevented from passing. A wrongfully restrains Z. 
340. Wrongful confinement.—Whoever wrongfully restrains any person in such a manner as to 
prevent that person from proceedings beyond certain circumscribing limits, is said “wrongfully to 
confine” that person. 
 
 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 8. 

77 
 
Illustrations 
(a) A causes Z to go within a walled space, and locks Z in Z is thus prevented from proceeding in any 
direction beyond the circumscribing line of wall. A wrongfully confines Z. 
(b) A places men with firearms at the outlets of a building, and tells Z that they will fire at Z if Z 
attempts leave the building. A wrongfully confines Z. 
341. Punishment for wrongful restraint.—Whoever wrongfully restrains any person shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
342. Punishment for wrongful confinement.—Whoever wrongfully confines any person shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine 
which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
343. Wrongful confinement for three or more days.—Whoever wrongfully confines any person for 
three days, or more, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
344. Wrongful confinement for ten or more days.—Whoever wrongfully confines any person for 
ten days, or more, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
345. Wrongful confinement of person for whose liberation writ has been issued.—Whoever 
keeps any person in wrongful confinement, knowing that a writ for the liberation of that person has been 
duly issued, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years in addition to any term of imprisonment to which he may be liable under any other section of 
this Chapter. 
346. Wrongful confinement in secret.—Whoever wrongfully confines any person in such manner as 
to indicate an intention that the confinement of such person may not be known to any person interested in 
the person so confined, or to any public servant, or that the place of such confinement may not be known 
to or discovered by any such person or public servant as hereinbefore mentioned, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years in addition to any other 
punishment to which he may be liable for such wrongful confinement. 
347. Wrongful confinement to extort property, or constrain to illegal act.—Whoever wrongfully 
confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the person confined, or from any person interested 
in the person confined, any property or valuable security or of constraining the person confined or any 
person interested in such person to do anything illegal or to give any information which may facilitate the 
commission of an offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
348. Wrongful confinement to extort confession, or compel restoration of property.—Whoever 
wrongfully confines any person for the purpose of extorting from the person confined or any person 
interested in the person confined any confession or any information which may lead to the detection of an 
offence or misconduct, or for the purpose of constraining the person confined or any person interested in 
the person confined to restore or to cause the restoration of any property or valuable security or to satisfy 
any claim or demand, or to give information which may lead to the restoration of any property or valuable 
security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of Criminal Force and Assault 
349. Force.—A person is said to use force to another if he causes motion, change of motion, or 
cessation of motion to that other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or change of motion, or 
cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with any part of that other's body, or with 
anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so situated that such contact affects that 
other's sense of feeling: Provided that the person causing the motion, or change of motion, or cessation of 
motion, causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of the three ways hereinafter 
described: 

78 
 
First.—By his own bodily power. 
Secondly.—By disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion or change or cessation of 
motion takes place without any further act on his part, or on the part of any other person. 
Thirdly.—By inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to cease to move. 
350. Criminal force.—Whoever intentionally uses force to any person, without that person's consent, 
in order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause, or knowing it to 
be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or annoyance to the person to whom the 
force is used, is said to use criminal force to that other. 
Illustrations 
(a) Z is sitting in a moored boat on a river. A unfastens the moorings, and thus intentionally causes the boat to drift down the 
stream. Here A intentionally causes motion to Z, and he does this by disposing substances in such a manner that the motion is 
produced without any other action on any person's part. A has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so 
without Z's consent, in order to the committing of any offence, or intending or knowing it to be likely that this use of force will 
cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force to Z. 
(b) Z is riding in a chariot. A lashes Z's horses, and thereby causes them to quicken their pace. Here A has caused change of 
motion to Z by inducing the animals to change their motion. A has therefore used force to Z; and if A has done this without Z's 
consent, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, A has used criminal force to Z. 
(c) Z is riding in a palanquin. A, intending to rob Z, seizes the pole and stops the palanquin. Here A has caused cessation of 
motion to Z, and he has done this by his own bodily power. A has therefore used force to Z; and as A has acted thus intentionally, 
without Z's consent, in order to the commission of an offence. A has used criminal force to Z. 
(d) A intentionally pushes against Z in the street. Here A has by his own bodily power moved his own person so as to bring 
it into contact with Z. He has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done so without Z's consent, intending or 
knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal force to Z. 
(e) A throws a stone, intending or knowing it to be likely that the stone will be thus brought into contact with Z, or with Z's 
clothes, or with something carried by Z, or that it will strike water and dash up the water against Z's clothes or something carried 
by Z. Here, if the throwing of the stone produce the effect of causing any substance to come into contact with Z, or Z's clothes, A 
has used force to Z, and if he did so without Z's consent, intending thereby to injure, frighten or annoy Z, he has used criminal 
force to Z. 
(f) A intentionally pulls up a Woman's veil. Here A intentionally uses force to her, and if he does so without her consent 
intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby injure, frighten or annoy her, he has used criminal force to her. 
(g) Z is bathing. A pours into the bath water which he knows to be boiling. Here A intentionally by his own bodily power 
causes such motion in the boiling water as brings that water into contact with Z, or with other water so situated that such contact 
must affect Z's sense of feeling; A has therefore intentionally used force to Z; and if he has done this without Z's consent 
intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, A has used criminal force. 
(h) A incites a dog to spring upon Z, without Z's consent. Here, if A intends to cause injury, fear or annoyance to Z, he uses 
criminal force to Z. 
351. Assault.—Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be likely 
that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he who makes that 
gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an assault. 
Explanation.—Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a person uses may give 
to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those gestures or preparations amount to an 
assault. 
Illustrations 
(a) A shakes his fist at Z, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to believe that A is about to strike 
Z. A has committed an assault. 
(b) A begins to unloose the muzzle of a ferocious dog, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause Z to 
believe that he is about to cause the dog to attack Z. A has committed an assault upon Z. 
(c) A takes up a stick, saying to Z, “I will give you a beating”. Here, though the words used by A could in no case amount to 
an assault, and though the mere gesture, unaccompanied by any other circumstances, might not amount to an assault,the gesture 
explained by the words may amount to an assault. 
352. Punishment for assault or criminal force otherwise than on grave provocation.—Whoever 
assaults or uses criminal force to any person otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by 
that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 

79 
 
Explanation.—Grave and sudden provocation will not mitigate the punishment for an offence under 
this section, if the provocation is sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender as an excuse for the 
offence, or 
if the provocation is given by anything done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant, in the 
lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant, or 
if the provocation is given by anything done in the lawful exercise of the right of private defence. 
 Whether the provocation was grave and sudden enough to mitigate the offence, is a question of fact. 
353. Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty.—Whoever 
assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in the execution of his duty as such 
public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person from discharging his duty as such public 
servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by such person to the lawful 
discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
354. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty.—Whoever assaults 
or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will there by 
outrage her modesty, 1[shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less 
than one year but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine]. 
2[354A. Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment.—(1) Aman committing any 
of the following acts— 
(i) physical contact and advances involving unwelcome and explicit sexual overtures; or 
(ii) a demand or request for sexual favours; or 
(iii) showing pornography against the will of a woman; or 
(iv) making sexually coloured remarks,  
shall be guilty of the offence of sexual harassment. 
(2) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (i) or clause (ii) or clause (iii) of  
sub-section (1) shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, 
or with fine, or with both. 
(3) Any man who commits the offence specified in clause (iv) of sub-section (1) shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with 
both. 
354B. Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe.—Any man who assaults 
or uses criminal force to any woman or abets such act with the intention of disrobing or compelling her to 
be naked, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less 
than three years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
354C. Voyeurism.—Any man who watches, or captures the image of a woman engaging in a private 
act in circumstances where she would usually have the expectation of not being observed either by the 
perpetrator or by any other person at the behest of the perpetrator or disseminates such image shall be 
punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less 
than one year, but which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine, and be punished on a 
second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be 
less than three years, but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
 Explanation 1.—For the purpose of this section, “private act” includes an act of watching carried out 
in a place which, in the circumstances, would reasonably be expected to provide privacy and where the 
victim's genitals, posterior or breasts are exposed or covered only in underwear; or the victim is using a 
lavatory; or the victim is doing a sexual act that is not of a kind ordinarily done in public. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 6, for “shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 

80 
 
Explanation 2.—Where the victim consents to the capture of the images or any act, but not to their 
dissemination to third persons and where such image or act is disseminated, such dissemination shall be 
considered an offence under this section. 
354D. Stalking.—(1) Any man who— 
(i) follows a woman and contacts, or attempts to contact such woman to foster personal 
interaction repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by such woman; or 
(ii) monitors the use by a woman of the internet, email or any other form of electronic 
communication, 
commits the offence of stalking: 
Provided that such conduct shall not amount to stalking if the man who pursued it proves that— 
(i) it was pursued for the purpose of preventing or detecting crime and the man accused of 
stalking had been entrusted with the responsibility of prevention and detection of crime by the 
State; or 
(ii) it was pursued under any law or to comply with any condition or requirement imposed by 
any person under any law; or 
(iii) in the particular circumstances such conduct was reasonable and justified. 
(2) Whoever commits the offence of stalking shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and be 
punished on a second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine.] 
355. Assault or criminal force with intent to dishonour person, otherwise than on grave 
provocation. —Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, intending thereby to dishonour 
that person, otherwise than on grave and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
356. Assault or criminal force in attempt to commit theft of property carried by a person.—
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person, in attempting to commit theft on any property 
which that person is then wearing or carrying, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
357. Assault or criminal force in attempt wrongfully to confine a person.—Whoever assaults or 
uses criminal force to any person, in attempting wrongfully to confine that person, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
358. Assault or criminal force on grave provocation.—Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to 
any person on grave and sudden provocation given by that person, shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees, or with both. 
Explanation.—The last section is subject to the same Explanation as section 352. 
Of Kidnapping, Abduction, Slavery and Forced Labour 
359. Kidnapping.—Kidnapping is of two kinds: kidnapping from 1[India], and kidnapping from 
lawful guardianship. 
360. Kidnapping from India.—Whoever conveys any person beyond the limits of 1[India] without 
the consent of that person, or of some person legally authorised to consent on behalf of that person, is said 
to kidnap that person from 1[India]. 
361. Kidnapping from lawful guardianship.—Whoever takes or entices any minor under 2[sixteen] 
years of age if a male, or under 3[eighteen] years of age if a female, or any person of unsound mind, out of 
the keeping of the lawful guardian of such minor or person of unsound mind, without the consent of such 
guardian, is said to kidnap such minor or person from lawful guardianship. 
                                                          
1. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
2. Subs. by Act 42 of 1949, s. 2, for “fourteen”. 
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “sixteen”. 

81 
 
Explanation.—The words “lawful guardian” in this section include any person lawfully entrusted 
with the care or custody of such minor or other person. 
Exception.—This section does not extend to the act of any person who in good faith believes himself 
to be the father of an illegitimate child, or who in good faith believes himself to be entitled to the lawful 
custody of such child, unless such act is committed for an immoral or unlawful purpose. 
362. Abduction.—Whoever by force compels, or by any deceitful means induces, any person to go 
from any place, is said to abduct that person. 
363. Punishment for kidnapping.—Whoever kidnaps any person from 1[India] or from lawful 
guardianship, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
2[363A. Kidnapping or maiming a minor for purposes of begging.—(1) Whoever kidnaps any 
minor or, not being the lawful guardian of a minor, obtains the custody of the minor, in order that such 
minor may be employed or used for the purposes of begging shall be punishable with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Whoever maims any minor in order that such minor may be employed or used for the purposes of 
begging shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(3) Where any person, not being the lawful guardian of a minor, employs or uses such minor for the 
purposes of begging, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he kidnapped or otherwise 
obtained the custody of that minor in order that the minor might be employed or used for the purposes of 
begging. 
(4) In this section,— 
(a) “begging” means— 
(i) soliciting or receiving alms in a public place, whether under the pretence of singing, 
dancing, fortunetelling, performing tricks or selling articles or otherwise; 
(ii) entering on any private premises for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; 
(iii) exposing or exhibiting, with the object of obtaining or extorting alms, any sore, wound, 
injury, deformity or disease, whether of himself or of any other person or of an animal; 
(iv) using a minor as an exhibit for the purpose of soliciting or receiving alms; 
(b) “minor” means— 
(i) in the case of a male, a person under sixteen years of age; and 
(ii) in the case of a female, a person under eighteen years of age.]  
364. Kidnapping or abducting in order to murder.—Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in 
order that such person may be murdered or may be so disposed of as to be put in danger of being 
murdered, shall be punished with 3[imprisonment for life] or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
IIIustrations 
(a) A kidnaps Z from 1[India], intending or knowing it to be likely that Z may be sacrificed to an idol. A has committed the 
offence defined in this section. 
(b) A forcibly carries or entices B away from his home in order that B may be murdered. A has committed the offence 
defined in this section. 
4[364A. Kidnapping for ransom, etc.—Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person or keeps a person in 
detention after such kidnapping or abduction, and threatens to cause death or hurt to such person, or by 
his conduct gives rise to a reasonable apprehension that such person may be put to death or hurt, or causes 
hurt or death to such person in order to compel the Government or 5[any foreign State or international 
                                                          
1. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
2. Ins. by Act 52 of 1959, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-1-1960). 
3. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
4. Ins. by Act 42 of 1993, s. 2. 
5. Subs. by Act 24 of 1995, s. 2, for “any other person”. 

82 
 
inter-governmental organisation or any other person] to do or abstain from doing any act or to pay a 
ransom, shall be punishable with death, or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.] 
365. Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to confine person.—Whoever 
kidnaps or abducts any person with intent to cause that person to be secretly and wrongfully confined, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
366. Kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her marriage, etc.—Whoever kidnaps 
or abducts any woman with intent that she may be compelled, or knowing it to be likely that she will be 
compelled, to marry any person against her will, or in order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit 
intercourse, or knowing it to be likely that she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine; 1[and whoever, by means of criminal intimidation as defined in this Code or of abuse of 
authority or any other method of compulsion, induces any woman to go from any place with intent that 
she may be, or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with 
another person shall also be punishable as aforesaid]. 
2[366A. Procuration of minor girl.—Whoever, by any means whatsoever, induces any minor girl 
under the age of eighteen years to go from any place or to do any act with intent that such girl may be, or 
knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person shall 
be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
366B. Importation of girl from foreign country.—Whoever imports into 3[India] from any country 
outside India 4[or from the State of Jammu and Kashmir] any girl under the age of twenty-one years with 
intent that she may be, or knowing it to be likely that she will be, forced or seduced to illicit intercourse 
with another person, 5*** shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to ten years and shall 
shall also be liable to fine.] 
367. Kidnapping or abducting in order to subject person to grievous hurt, slavery, etc.—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any person in order that such person may be subjected, or may be so 
disposed of as to be put in danger of being subjected to grievous hurt, or slavery, or to the unnatural lust 
of any person, or knowing it to be likely that such person will be so subjected or disposed of, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
368. Wrongfully concealing or keeping in confinement, kidnapped or abducted person.—
Whoever, knowing that any person has been kidnapped or has been abducted, wrongfully conceals or 
confines such person, shall be punished in the same manner as if he had kidnapped or abducted such 
person with the same intention or knowledge, or for the same purpose as that with or for which he 
conceals or detains such person in confinement. 
369. Kidnapping or abducting child under ten years with intent to steal from its person.—
Whoever kidnaps or abducts any child under the age of ten years with the intention of taking dishonestly 
any movable property from the person of such child, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
6[370. Trafficking of person.—(1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation, (a) recruits, (b) transports, 
(c) harbours, (d) transfers, or (e) receives, a person or persons, by— 
First.—using threats, or 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 20 of 1923, s. 2. 
 
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. 
3. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 
4. Ins. by Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch. 
5. Certain words omitted by s. 3 and the Sch., ibid. 
6. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 8, for section 370 (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 

83 
 
Secondly.—using force, or any other form of coercion, or 
Thirdly.—by abduction, or 
Fourthly.—by practising fraud, or deception, or 
Fifthly.—by abuse of power, or 
Sixthly.— by inducement, including the giving or receiving of payments or benefits, in order to achieve 
the consent of any person having control overthe person recruited, transported, harboured, transferred or 
received, 
commits the offence of trafficking. 
Explanation 1.—The expression "exploitation" shall include any act of physical exploitation or any form 
of sexual exploitation, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude, or the forced removal of organs. 
Explanation 2.—Theconsent of the victim is immaterial in determination of the offence of 
trafficking. 
(2)Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and 
shall also be liable to fine. 
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a minor, it shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for 
a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one minor, it shall be punishable with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than fourteen years, but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(6) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of minor on more than one occasion, then 
such person shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the 
remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(7) When a public servant or a police officer is involved in the trafficking of any person then, such 
public servant or police officer shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean 
imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
370A. Exploitation of a trafficked person.—(1) Whoever, knowingly or having reason to believe 
that a minor has been trafficked, engages such minor for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) Whoever, knowingly by or having reason to believe that a person has been trafficked, engages 
such person for sexual exploitation in any manner, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable 
to fine.] 
371. Habitual dealing in slaves.—Whoever habitually imports, exports, removes, buys, sells, traffics 
or deals in slaves, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
372. Selling minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.—Whoever sells, lets to hire, or otherwise 
disposes of any 2[person under the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be 
employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful 
and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be] employed or used for 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life”. 
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1924, s. 2, for certain words. 

84 
 
any such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
1[Explanation I.—When a female under the age of eighteen years is sold, let for hire, or otherwise 
disposed of to a prostitute or to any person who keeps or manages a brothel, the person so disposing of 
such female shall, until the contrary is proved, be presumed to have disposed of her with the intent that 
she shall be used for the purpose of prostitution. 
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this section “illicit intercourse” means sexual intercourse 
between persons not united by marriage or by any union or tie which, though not amounting to a 
marriage, is recognised by the personal law or custom of the community to which they belong or, where 
they belong to different communities, of both such communities, as constituting between them a quasi-
marital relation.] 
373. Buying minor for purposes of prostitution, etc.—Whoever buys, hires or otherwise obtains 
possession of any 2[person under the age of eighteen years with intent that such person shall at any age be 
employed or used for the purpose of prostitution or illicit intercourse with any person or for any unlawful 
and immoral purpose, or knowing it to be likely that such person will at any age be] employed or used for 
any such purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend 
to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
3[Explanation I.—Any prostitute or any person keeping or managing a brothel, who buys, hires or 
otherwise obtains possession of a female under the age of eighteen years shall, until the contrary is 
proved, be presumed to have obtained possession of such female with the intent that she shall be used for 
the purpose of prostitution. 
Explanation II.—“Illicit intercourse” has the same meaning as in section 372.] 
374. Unlawful compulsory labour.—Whoever unlawfully compels any person to labour against the 
will of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
4[Sexual offences 
5[375. Rape.—A man is said to commit “rape” if he— 
(a) penetrates his penis, to any extent, into the vagina, mouth, urethra or anus of a woman or 
makes her to do so with him or any other person; or 
(b) inserts, to any extent, any object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the 
urethra or anus of a woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; or 
(c) manipulates any part of the body of a woman so as to cause penetration into the vagina, 
urethra, anus or any part of body of such woman or makes her to do so with him or any other person; 
or 
(d) applies his mouth to the vagina, anus, urethra of a woman or makes her to do so with him or 
any other person, 
under the circumstances falling under any of the following seven descriptions:— 
First.—Against her will. 
Secondly.—Without her consent. 
Thirdly.—With her consent, when her consent has been obtained by putting her or any person in 
whom she is interested, in fear of death or of hurt. 
Fourthly.—With her consent, when the man knows that he is not her husband and that her 
consent is given because she believes that he is another man to whom she is or believes herself to be 
lawfully married. 
 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 18 of 1924, s. 3 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for certain words. 
3. Added by s. 4, ibid. 
4. Subs. by Act 43 of 1983, s. 3, for the heading “Of rape” and ss. 375 and 376. 
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 9, for sections 375, 376, 376A, 376B, 376C and 376D (w.e.f. 03-02-2013). 

85 
 
Fifthly.—With her consent when, at the time of giving such consent, by reason of unsoundness of 
mind or intoxication or the administration by him personally or through another of any stupefying or 
unwholesome substance, she is unable to understand the nature and consequences of that to which she 
gives consent. 
Sixthly.—With or without her consent, when she is under eighteen years of age. 
Seventhly.—When she is unable to communicate consent. 
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this section, “vagina” shall also include labia majora. 
Explanation 2.—Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement when the woman by words, 
gestures or any form of verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates willingness to participate in 
the specific sexual act: 
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the act of penetration shall not by the reason 
only of that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity. 
Exception 1.—A medical procedure or intervention shall not constitute rape. 
Exception 2.—Sexual intercourse or sexual acts by a man with his own wife, the wife not being under 
fifteen years of age, is not rape. 
376. Punishment for rape.—(1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for in sub-section (2), 
commits rape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description for a term which 1[shall 
not be less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine]. 
(2) Whoever,— 
(a) being a police officer, commits rape— 
(i) within the limits of the police station to which such police officer is appointed; or 
(ii) in the premises of any station house; or 
(iii) on a woman in such police officer's custody or in the custody of a police officer 
subordinate to such police officer; or 
(b) being a public servant, commits rape on a woman in such public servant's custody or in the 
custody of a public servant subordinate to such public servant; or 
(c) being a member of the armed forces deployed in an area by the Central or a State Government 
commits rape in such area; or 
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand home or other place of custody 
established by or under any law for the time being in force or of a women's or children's institution, 
commits rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home, place or institution; or 
(e) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital, commits rape on a woman in that 
hospital; or 
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person in a position of trust or authority towards 
the woman, commits rape on such woman; or 
(g) commits rape during communal or sectarian violence; or 
(h) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or 
2* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(j) commits rape, on a woman incapable of giving consent; or 
(k) being in a position of control or dominance over a woman, commits rape on such woman; or 
 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 4, for “shall not be less than seven years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall 
also be liable to fine” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
2. Clause (i) omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
 

86 
 
(l) commits rape on a woman suffering from mental or physical disability; or 
(m) while committing rape causes grievous bodily harm or maims or disfigures or endangers the 
life of a woman; or 
(n) commits rape repeatedly on the same woman, 
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which 
may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's 
natural life, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,— 
(a) “armed forces” means the naval, military and air forces and includes any member of the 
Armed Forces constituted under any law for the time being in force, including the paramilitary forces 
and any auxiliary forces that are under the control of the Central Government or the State 
Government; 
(b) “hospital” means the precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts of any institution for 
the reception and treatment of persons during convalescence or of persons requiring medical attention 
or rehabilitation; 
(c) “police officer” shall have the same meaning as assigned to the expression “police” under the 
Police Act, 1861 (5 of 1861); 
(d) “women's or children's institution” means an institution, whether called an orphanage or a 
home for neglected women or children or a widow's home or an institution called by any other name, 
which is established and maintained for the reception and care of women or children. 
1[(3) Whoever, commits rape on a woman under sixteen years of age shall be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to 
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, 
and shall also be liable to fine: 
 Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and 
rehabilitation of the victim:  
Provided further that any fine imposed under this sub-section shall be paid to the victim.] 
376A. Punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim.—
Whoever, commits an offence punishable under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 376 and in 
the course of such commission inflicts an injury which causes the death of the woman or causes the 
woman to be in a persistent vegetative state, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall 
mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, or with death. 
2[376AB. Punishment for rape on woman under twelve years of age.—Whoever, commits rape on 
a woman under twelve years of age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than twenty years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean 
imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and with fine or with death:  
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of 
the victim: 
 Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.] 
376B. Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation.—Whoever has sexual 
intercourse with his own wife, who is living separately, whether under a decree of separation or 
otherwise, without her consent, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 4 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid., (w.e.f. 21-4-2018). 
 

87 
 
Explanation.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned in clauses 
(a) to (d) of section 375. 
376C. Sexual intercourse by a person in authority.—Whoever, being— 
(a) in a position of authority or in a fiduciary relationship; or 
(b) a public servant; or 
(c) superintendent or manager of a jail, remand home or other place of custody established by or 
under any law for the time being in force, or a women's or children's institution; or 
(d) on the management of a hospital or being on the staff of a hospital,  
abuses such position or fiduciary relationship to induce or seduce any woman either in his custody or 
under his charge or present in the premises to have sexual intercourse with him, such sexual intercourse 
not amounting to the offence of rape, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either description 
for a term which shall not be less than five years, but which may extend to ten years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
Explanation 1.—In this section, “sexual intercourse” shall mean any of the acts mentioned in 
clauses (a) to (d) of section 375. 
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of this section, Explanation 1 to section 375 shall also be 
applicable. 
Explanation 3.—“Superintendent”, in relation to a jail, remand home or other place of custody or 
a women's or children's institution, includes a person holding any other office in such jail, remand 
home, place or institution by virtue of which such person can exercise any authority or control over 
its inmates. 
Explanation 4.—The expressions “hospital” and “women's or children's institution” shall 
respectively have the same meaning as in Explanation to sub-section (2) of section 376. 
376D. Gang rape.—Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting 
in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the 
offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
twenty years, but which may extend to life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person's natural life, and with fine: 
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of 
the victim: 
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim. 
1[376DA. Punishment for gang rape on woman under sixteen years of age.—Where a woman 
under sixteen years of age is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting in furtherance of 
a common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape and 
shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person's natural life, and with fine: 
 Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation 
of the victim:  
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim. 
376DB. Punishment for gang rape on woman under twelve years of age.—Where a woman under 
twelve years of age is raped by one or more persons constituting a group or acting in furtherance of a 
common intention, each of those persons shall be deemed to have committed the offence of rape and shall 
be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's 
natural life, and with fine, or with death:  
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and rehabilitation of 
the victim:  
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 6 (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).  

88 
 
Provided further that any fine imposed under this section shall be paid to the victim.] 
376E. Punishment for repeat offenders.—Whoever has been previously convicted of an offence 
punishable under section 376 or section 376A or 1[section 376AB or section 376D or section 376DA or 
section 376DB,]  and is subsequently convicted of an offence punishable under any of the said sections 
shall be punished with imprisonment for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that 
person's natural life, or with death.]] 
Of Unnatural Offences 
377. Unnatural offences.—Whoever voluntarily has carnal intercourse against the order of nature 
with any man, woman or animal, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—Penetration is sufficient to constitute the carnal intercourse necessary to the offence 
described in this section. 
CHAPTER XVII 
OF OFFENCESAGAINST PROPERTY 
Of Theft 
378. Theft.—Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of 
any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit 
theft. 
Explanation 1.—A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable property, is not the 
subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of theft as soon as it is severed from the earth. 
Explanation 2.—A moving effected by the same act which effects the severance may be a theft. 
Explanation 3.—A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle which prevented 
it from moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by actually moving it. 
Explanation 4.—A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to move that animal, 
and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal. 
Explanation 5.—The consent mentioned in the definition may be express or implied, and may be 
given either by the person in possession, or by any person having for that purpose authority either express 
or implied. 
Illustrations 
(a) A cuts down a tree on Z's ground, with the intention of dishonestly taking the tree out of Z's possession without Z's 
consent. Here, as soon as A has severed the tree in order to such taking, he has committed theft. 
(b) A puts a bait for dogs in his pocket, and thus induces Z's dog to follow it. Here, if A's intention be dishonestly to take the 
dog out of Z's possession without Z's consent, A has committed theft as soon as Z's dog has begun to follow A. 
(c) A meets a bullock carrying a box of treasure. He drives the bullock in a certain direction, in order that he may 
dishonestly take the treasure. As soon as the bullock begins to move, A has committed theft of the treasure. 
(d) A being Z's servant, and entrusted by Z with the care of Z's plate, dishonestly runs away with the plate, without Z's 
consent. A has committed theft. 
(e) Z, going on a journey, entrusts his plate to A, the keeper of a warehouse, till Z shall return. A carries the plate to a 
goldsmith and sells it. Here the plate was not in Z's possession. It could not therefore be taken out of Z's possession, and A has 
not committed theft, though he may have committed criminal breach of trust. 
(f) A finds a ring belonging to Z on a table in the house which Z occupies. Here the ring is in Z's possession, and if A 
dishonestly removes it, A commits theft. 
(g) A finds a ring lying on the highroad, not in the possession of any person. A, by taking it, commits no theft, though he 
may commit criminal misappropriation of property. 
(h) A sees a ring belonging to Z lying on a table in Z's house. Not venturing to misappropriate the ring immediately for fear 
of search and detection, A hides the ring in a place where it is highly improbable that it will ever be found by Z, with the 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 22 of 2018, s. 7, for “section 376D” (w.e.f. 21-4-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

89 
 
intention of taking the ring from the hiding place and selling it when the loss is forgotten. Here A, at the time of first moving the 
ring, commits theft. 
(i) A delivers his watch to Z, a jeweller, to be regulated. Z carries it to his shop. A, not owing to the jeweller any debt for 
which the jeweller might lawfully detain the watch as a security, enters the shop openly, takes his watch by force out of Z's hand, 
and carries it away. Here A, though he may have committed criminal trespass and assault, has not committed theft, inasmuch as 
what he did was not done dishonestly.  
(j) If A owes money to Z for repairing the watch, and if Z retains the watch lawfully as a security for the debt, and A takes 
the watch out of Z's possession, with the intention of depriving Z of the property as a security for his debt, he commits theft, 
inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly. 
(k) Again, if A, having pawned his watch to Z, takes it out of Z's possession without Z's consent, not having paid what he 
borrowed on the watch, he commits theft, though the watch is his own property inasmuch as he takes it dishonestly. 
(l) A takes an article belonging to Z out of Z's possession without Z's consent, with the intention of keeping it until he 
obtains money from Z as a reward for its restoration. Here A takes dishonestly; A has therefor committed theft. 
(m) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in Z's absence, and takes away a book without Z's express 
consent for the purpose merely of reading it, and with the intention of returning it. Here, it is probable that A may have conceived 
that he had Z's implied consent to use Z's book. If this was A's impression, A has not committed theft. 
(n) A asks charity from Z's wife. She gives A money, food and clothes, which A knows to belong to Z her husband. Here it 
is probable that A may conceive that Z's wife is authorised to give away alms. If this was A's impression, A has not committed 
theft. 
(o) A is the paramour of Z's wife. She gives a valuable property, which A knows to belong to her husband Z, and to be such 
property as she has not authority from Z to give. If A takes the property dishonestly, he commits theft. 
(p) A, in good faith, believing property belonging to Z to be A's own property, takes that property out of B's possession. 
Here, as A does not take dishonestly, he does not commit theft. 
379. Punishment for theft.—Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
380. Theft in dwelling house, etc.—Whoever commits theft in any building, tent or vessel, which 
building, tent or vessel is used as a human dwelling, or used for the custody of property, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
381. Theft by clerk or servant of property in possession of master.—Whoever, being a clerk or 
servant, or being employed in the capacity of a clerk or servant, commits theft in respect of any property 
in the possession of his master or employer, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
382. Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to the 
committing of the theft.—Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, 
or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any person, in order to the committing of such 
theft, or in order to the effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft, or in order to the 
retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
 Illustrations 
(a) A commits theft on property in Z's possession; and while committing this theft, he has a loaded pistol under his garment, 
having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting Z in case Z should resist. A has committed the offence defined in this 
section. 
(b) A picks Z's pocket, having posted several of his companions near him, in order that they may restrain Z, if Z should 
perceive what is passing and should resist, or should attempt to apprehend A. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
Of Extortion 
383. Extortion.—Whoever intentionally puts any person in fear of any injury to that person, or to any 
other, and thereby dishonestly induces the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property, or 
valuable security or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security, commits 
“extortion”. 
Illustrations 
(a) A threatens to publish a defamatory libel concerning Z unless Z gives him money. He thus induces Z to give him money. 
A has committed extortion. 

90 
 
(b) A threatens Z that he will keep Z's child in wrongful confinement, unless Z will sign and deliver to A a promissory note 
binding Z to pay certain monies to A. Z sings and delivers the note. A has committed extortion. 
(c) A threatens to send club-men to plough up Z's field unless Z will sign and deliver to B a bond binding Z under a penalty 
to deliver certain produce to B, and thereby induces Z to sign and deliver the bond. A has committed extortion. 
(d) A, by putting Z in fear of grievous hurt, dishonestly induces Z to sign or affix his seal to a blank paper and deliver it to 
A. Z sings and delivers the paper to A. Here, as the paper so signed may be converted into a valuable security. A has committed 
extortion. 
384. Punishment for extortion.—Whoever commits extortion shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
385. Putting person in fear of injury in order to commit extortion.—Whoever, in order to the 
committing of extortion, puts any person in fear, or attempts to put any person in fear, of any injury, shall 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
386. Extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt.—Whoever commits 
extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
387. Putting person in fear of death or of grievous hurt, in order to commit extortion.—
Whoever, in order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fear of death or of 
grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
388. Extortion by threat of accusation of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for 
life, etc.—Whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of an accusation against that person 
or any other, of having committed or attempted to commit any offence punishable with death, or with 
1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, or of having 
attempted to induce any other person to commit such offence, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the 
offence be one punishable under section 377 of this Code, may be punished with 1[imprisonment for life]. 
389. Putting person in fear or accusation of offence, in order to commit extortion.—Whoever, in 
order to the committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fear of an accusation, against 
that person or any other, of having committed, or attempted to commit, an offence punishable with death 
or with 1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine; and, if the offence be punishable under section 377 of this Code, may be punished with 
1[imprisonment for life]. 
Of Robbery and Dacoity 
390. Robbery.—In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. 
When theft is robbery.—Theft is “robbery” if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in 
committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the 
offender, for that end voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful 
restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. 
When extortion is robbery.—Extortion is “robbery” if the offender, at the time of committing the 
extortion, is in the presence of the person put in fear, and commits the extortion by putting that person in 
fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint to that person or to some other person, 
and, by so putting in fear, induces the person so put in fear then and there to deliver up the thing extorted. 
Explanation.—The offender is said to be present if he is sufficiently near to put the other person in 
fear of instant death, of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. 
 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

91 
 
Illustrations 
(a) A holds Z down, and fraudulently takes Z's money and jewels from Z's clothes, without Z's consent. Here A has 
committed theft, and, in order to the committing of that theft, has voluntarily caused wrongful restraint to Z. A has therefore 
committed robbery. 
(b) A meets Z on the high road, shows a pistol, and demands Z's purse. Z, in consequence, surrenders his purse. Here A has 
extorted the purse from Z by putting him in fear of instant hurt, and being at the time of committing the extortion in his presence. 
A has therefore committed robbery. 
(c) A meets Z and Z's child on the high road. A takes the child, and threatens to filing it down a precipice, unless Z delivers 
his purse. Z, in consequence, delivers his purse. Here A has extorted the purse from Z, by causing Z to be in fear of instant hurt to 
the child who is there present. A has therefore committed robbery on Z. 
(d) A obtains property from Z by saying “Your child is in the hands of my gang, and will be put to death unless you send us 
ten thousand rupees”. This is extortion, and punishable as such: but it is not robbery, unless Z is put in fear of the instant death of 
his child. 
391. Dacoity.—When five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery, or 
where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery, and 
persons present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so 
committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit “dacoity”. 
392. Punishment for robbery.—Whoever commits robbery shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the robbery 
be committed on the highway between sunset and sunrise, the imprisonment may be extended to fourteen 
years. 
393. Attempt to commit robbery.—Whoever attempts to commit robbery shall be punished with 
rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
394. Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery.—If any person, in committing or in 
attempting to commit robbery, voluntarily causes hurt, such person, and any other person jointly 
concerned in committing or attempting to commit such robbery, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment 
for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
395. Punishment for dacoity.—Whoever commits dacoity shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for 
life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
396. Dacoity with murder.—If any one of five or more persons, who are conjointly committing 
dacoity, commits murder in so committing dacoity, every one of those persons shall be punished with 
death, or 1[imprisonment for life], or rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
397. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt.—If, at the time of 
committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any 
person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the imprisonment with which such 
offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years. 
398. Attempt to commit robbery or dacoity when armed with deadly weapon.—If, at the time of 
attempting to commit robbery or dacoity, the offender is armed with any deadly weapon, the 
imprisonment with which such offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years. 
399. Making preparation to commit dacoity.—Whoever makes any preparation for committing 
dacoity, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

92 
 
400. Punishment for belonging to gang of dacoits.—Whoever, at any time after the passing of this 
Act, shall belong to a gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing dacoity, shall 
be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
401. Punishment for belonging to gang of thieves.—Whoever, at any time after the passing of this 
Act, shall belong to any wandering or other gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually 
committing theft or robbery, and not being a gang of thugs or dacoits, shall be punished with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
402. Assembling for purpose of committing dacoity.—Whoever, at any time after the passing of 
this Act, shall be one of five or more persons assembled for the purpose of committing dacoity, shall be 
punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
Of Criminal Misappropriation of Property 
403. Dishonest misappropriation of property.—Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts 
to his own use any movable property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A takes property belonging to Z out of Z's possession, in good faith believing at the time when he takes it, that the 
property belongs to himself. A is not guilty of theft; but if A, after discovering his mistake, dishonestly appropriates the property 
to his own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(b) A, being on friendly terms with Z, goes into Z's library in Z's absence, and takes away a book without Z's express 
consent. Here, if A was under the impression that he had Z's implied consent to take the book for the purpose of reading it, A has 
not committed theft. But, if A afterwards sells the book for his own benefit, he is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(c) A and B, being, joint owners of a horse, A takes the horse out of B's possession, intending to use it. Here, as A has a right 
to use the horse, he does not dishonestly misappropriate it. But, if A sells the horse and appropriates the whole proceeds to his 
own use, he is guilty of an offence under this section. 
Explanation 1.—A dishonest misappropriation for a time only is a misappropriation with the meaning 
of this section. 
Illustration 
A finds a Government promissory note belonging to Z, bearing a blank endorsement. A, knowing that the note belongs to Z, 
pledges it with a banker as a security or a loan, intending at a future time to restore it to Z. A has committed an offence under this 
section. 
Explanation 2.—A person who finds property not in the possession of any other person, and takes 
such property for the purpose of protecting it for, or of restoring it to, the owner, does not take or 
misappropriate it dishonestly, and is not guilty of an offence; but he is guilty of the offence above defined, 
if he appropriates it to his own use, when he knows or has the means of discovering the owner, or before 
he has used reasonable means to discover and give notice to the owner and has kept the property a 
reasonable time to enable the owner to claim it. 
What are reasonable means or what is a reasonable time in such a case, is a question of fact. 
It is not necessary that the finder should know who is the owner of the property, or that any particular 
person is the owner of it; it is sufficient if, at the time of appropriating it, he does not believe it to be his 
own property, or in good faith believe that the real owner cannot be found. 
Illustrations 
(a) A finds a rupee on the high road, not knowing to whom the rupee belongs, A picks up the rupee. Here A has not 
committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A finds a letter on the road, containing a bank note. From the direction and contents of the letter he learns to whom the 
note belongs. He appropriates the note. He is guilty of an offence under this section. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

93 
 
(c) A finds a cheque payable to bearer. He can form no conjecture as to the person who has lost the cheque. But the name of 
the person, who has drawn the cheque, appears. A knows that this person can direct him to the person in whose favour the cheque 
was drawn. A appropriates the cheque without attempting to discover the owner. He is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(d) A sees Z drop his purse with money in it. A picks up the purse with the intention of restoring it to Z, but afterwards 
appropriates it to his own use. A has committed an offence under this section. 
(e) A finds a purse with money, not knowing to whom it belongs; he afterwards discovers that it belongs to Z, and 
appropriates it to his own use. A is guilty of an offence under this section. 
(f) A finds a valuable ring, not knowing to whom it belongs. A sells it immediately without attempting to discover the 
owner. A is guilty of an offence under this section. 
404. Dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his 
death.—Whoever dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use property, knowing that such 
property was in the possession of a deceased person at the time of that person's decease, and has not since 
been in the possession of any person legally entitled to such possession, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to 
fine, and if the offender at the time of such person's decease was employed by him as a clerk or servant, 
the imprisonment may extend to seven years. 
Illustration 
Z dies in possession of furniture and money. His servant A, before the money comes into the possession of any person 
entitled to such possession, dishonestly misappropriates it. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
Of Criminal Breach of Trust 
405. Criminal breach of trust.—Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any 
dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property, or 
dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in 
which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made 
touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other person so to do, commits “criminal 
breach of trust”. 
1[2[Explanation 1].—A person, being an employer 3[of an establishment whether exempted under 
section 17 of the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952) or 
not] who deducts the employee’s contribution from the wages payable to the employee for credit to a 
Provident Fund or Family Pension Fund established by any law for the time being in force, shall be 
deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so deducted by him and if he makes 
default in the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation of the said law, shall be deemed 
to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation of a direction of law as 
aforesaid.] 
4[Explanation 2.—A person, being an employer, who deducts the employees’ contribution from the 
wages payable to the employee for credit to the Employees’ State Insurance Fund held and administered 
by the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation established under the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 
1948 (34 of 1948), shall be deemed to have been entrusted with the amount of the contribution so 
deducted by him and if he makes default in the payment of such contribution to the said Fund in violation 
of the said Act, shall be deemed to have dishonestly used the amount of the said contribution in violation 
of a direction of law as aforesaid.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A, being executor to the will of a deceased person, dishonestly disobeys the law which directs him to divide the effects 
according to the will, and appropriates them to his own use. A has committed criminal breach of trust. 
(b) A is a warehouse-keeper. Z going on a journey, entrusts his furniture to A, under a contract that it shall be returned on 
payment of a stipulated sum for warehouse room. A dishonestly sells the goods. A has committed criminal breach of trust. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1973, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-11-1973). 
2. Explanation numbered as Explanation 1 by Act 38 of 1975, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-9-1975). 
3. Ins. by Act 33 of 1988, s. 27 (w.e.f. 1-8-1988). 
4. Ins. by Act 38 of 1975, s. 9 (w.e.f. 1-9-1975). 

94 
 
(c) A, residing in Calcutta, is agent for Z, residing at Delhi. There is an express or implied contract between A and Z, that all 
sums remitted by Z to A shall be invested by A, according to Z's direction. Z remits a lakh of rupees to A, with directions to A to 
invest the same in Company's paper. A dishonestly disobeys the directions and employs the money in his own business. A has 
committed criminal breach of trust. 
(d) But if A, in the last illustration, not dishonestly but in good faith, believing that it will be more for Z's advantage to hold 
shares in the Bank of Bengal, disobeys Z's directions, and buys shares in the Bank of Bengal, for Z, instead of buying Company's 
paper, here, thought Z should suffer loss, and should be entitled to bring a civil action against A, on account of that loss, yet A, 
not having acted dishonestly, has not committed criminal breach of trust. 
(e) A, a revenue-officer, is entrusted with public money and is either directed by law, or bound by a contract, express or 
implied, with the Government, to pay into a certain treasury all the public money which he holds. A dishonestly appropriates the 
money. A has committed criminal breach of trust. 
(f) A, a carrier, is entrusted by Z with property to be carried by land or by water. A dishonestly misappropriates the property. 
A has committed criminal breach of trust. 
406. Punishment for criminal breach of trust.—Whoever commits criminal breach of trust shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with 
fine, or with both. 
407. Criminal breach of trust by carrier, etc.—Whoever, being entrusted with property as a carrier, 
wharfinger or warehouse-keeper, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of such property, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
408. Criminal breach of trust by clerk or servant.—Whoever, being a clerk or servant or employed 
as a clerk or servant, and being in any manner entrusted in such capacity with property, or with any 
dominion over property, commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
409. Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker, merchant or agent.—Whoever, 
being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any dominion over property in his capacity of a 
public servant or in the way of his business as a banker, merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent, 
commits criminal breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
Of the Receiving of Stolen Property 
410. Stolen property.—Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft, or by 
extortion, or by robbery, and property which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of which 
2*** 3***criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as “stolen property”, 4[whether the 
transfer has been made, or the misappropriation or breach of trust has been committed, within or without 
5[India]]. But, if such property subsequently comes into the possession of a person legally entitled to the 
possession thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property. 
411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property.—Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen 
property, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
412. Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a dacoity.—Whoever dishonestly 
receives or retains any stolen property, the possession whereof he knows or has reason to believe to have 
been transferred by the commission of dacoity, or dishonestly receives from a person, whom he knows or 
has reason to believe to belong or to have belonged to a gang of dacoits, property which he knows or has 
reason to believe to have been stolen, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. The word “the” rep by Act 12 of 1891, s. 2 and the First Sch. 
3. The words “offence of” rep by Act 8 of 1882, s. 9. 
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. 
5. The words “British India” have successively been subs. by the A. O. 1948, the A. O. 1950 and Act 3 of 1951, s. 3 and the Sch., 
to read as above. 

95 
 
413. Habitually dealing in stolen property.—Whoever habitually receives or deals in property 
which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
414. Assisting in concealment of stolen property.—Whoever voluntarily assists in concealing or 
disposing of or making away with property which he knows or has reason to believe to be stolen property, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
Of Cheating 
415. Cheating.—Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person 
so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, 
or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or 
omit if he were not so deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to 
that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to “cheat”. 
Explanation.—A dishonest concealment of facts is a deception within the meaning of this section. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, by falsely pretending to be in the Civil Service, intentionally deceives Z, and thus dishonestly induces Z to let him 
have on credit goods for which he does not mean to pay. A cheats. 
(b) A, by putting a counterfeit mark on an article, intentionally deceives Z into a belief that this article was made by a certain 
celebrated manufacturer, and thus dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for the article. A cheats. 
(c) A, by exhibiting to Z a false sample of an article intentionally deceives Z into believing that the article corresponds with 
the sample, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to buy and pay for the article. A cheats. 
(d) A, by tendering in payment for an article a bill on a house with which A keeps no money, and by which A expects that 
the bill will be dishonoured, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to deliver the article, intending not to 
pay for it. A cheats. 
(e) A, by pledging as diamond articles which he knows are not diamonds, intentionally deceives Z, and thereby dishonestly 
induces Z to lend money. A cheats. 
(f) A Intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to repay any money that Z may lend to him and thereby dishonestly 
induces Z to lend him money, A not intending to repay it. A cheats. 
(g) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A means to deliver to Z a certain quantity of indigo plant which he does not 
intend to deliver, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to advance money upon the faith of such delivery. A cheats; but if A, at the 
time of obtaining the money, intends to deliver the indigo plant, and afterwards breaks his contract and does not deliver it, he 
does not cheat, but is liable only to a civil action for breach of contract. 
(h) A intentionally deceives Z into a belief that A has performed A's part of a contract made with Z, which he has not 
performed, and thereby dishonestly induces Z to pay money. A cheats. 
(i) A sells and conveys an estate to B. A, knowing that in consequence of such sale he has no right to the property, sells or 
mortgages the same to Z, without disclosing the fact of the previous sale and conveyance to B, and receives the purchase or 
mortgage money from Z. A cheats. 
416. Cheating by personation.—A person is said to “cheat by personation” if he cheats by 
pretending to be some other person, or by knowingly substituting one person for or another, or 
representing that he or any other person is a person other than he or such other person really is. 
Explanation.—The offence is committed whether the individual personated is a real or imaginary 
person. 
Illustrations 
(a) A cheats by pretending to be a certain rich banker of the same name. A cheats by personation. 
(b) A cheats by pretending to be B, a person who is deceased. A cheats by personation. 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

96 
 
417. Punishment for cheating.—Whoever cheats shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
418. Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person whose interest offender is 
bound to protect.—Whoever cheats with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause wrongful loss 
to a person whose interest in the transaction to which the cheating relates, he was bound, either by law, or 
by a legal contract, to protect, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
419. Punishment for cheating by personation.—Whoever cheats by personation shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.—Whoever cheats and thereby 
dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy 
the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable 
of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of Fraudulent Deeds and Dispositions of Property 
421. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among 
creditors.—Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently removes, conceals or delivers to any person, or transfers 
or causes to be transferred to any person, without adequate consideration, any property, intending thereby 
to prevent, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby prevent, the distribution of that property 
according to law among his creditors or the creditors of any other person, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
422. Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors.—Whoever 
dishonestly or fraudulently prevents any debt or demand due to himself or to any other person from being 
made available according to law for payment of his debts or the debts of such other person, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, 
or with both. 
423. Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement of 
consideration.—Whoever dishonestly or fraudulently signs, executes or becomes a party to any deed or 
instrument which purports to transfer or subject to any charge any property, or any interest therein, and 
which contains any false statement relating to the consideration for such transfer or charge, or relating to 
the person or persons for whose use or benefit it is really intended to operate, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
424. Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property.—Whoever dishonestly or 
fraudulently conceals or removes any property of himself or any other person, or dishonestly or 
fraudulently assists in the concealment or removal thereof, or dishonestly releases any demand or claim to 
which he is entitled, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
Of Mischief 
425. Mischief.—Whoever with intent to cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or 
damage to the public or to any person, causes the destruction of any property, or any such change in any 
property or in the situation thereof as destroys or diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously, 
commits “mischief”. 
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to the offence of mischief that the offender should intend to cause 
loss or damage to the owner of the property injured or destroyed. It is sufficient if he intends to cause, or 
knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or damage to any person by injuring any property, whether 
it belongs to that person or not. 
Explanation 2.—Mischief may be committed by an act affecting property belonging to the person 
who commits the act, or to that person and others jointly. 
 

97 
 
Illustrations 
(a) A voluntarily burns a valuable security belonging to Z intending to cause wrongful loss to Z. A has committed mischief. 
(b) A introduces water in to an ice-house belonging to Z and thus causes the ice to melt, intending wrongful loss to Z. A has 
committed mischief. 
(c) A voluntarily throws into a river a ring belonging to Z, with the intention of thereby causing wrongful loss to Z. A has 
committed mischief. 
(d) A, knowing that his effects are about to be taken in execution in order to satisfy a debt due from him to Z, destroys those 
effects, with the intention of thereby preventing Z from obtaining satisfaction of the debt, and of thus causing damage to Z. A has 
committed mischief. 
(e) A having insured a ship, voluntarily causes the same to be cast away, with the intention of causing damage to the 
underwriters. A has committed mischief. 
(f) A causes a ship to be cast away, intending thereby to cause damage to Z who has lent money on bottomry on the ship. A 
has committed mischief. 
(g) A, having joint property with Z in a horse, shoots the horse, intending thereby to cause wrongful loss to Z. A has 
committed mischief. 
(h) A causes cattle to enter upon a field belonging to Z, intending to cause and knowing that he is likely to cause damage to 
Z's crop. A has committed mischief. 
426. Punishment for mischief.—Whoever commits mischief shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine, or with both. 
427. Mischief causing damage to the amount of fifty rupees.—Whoever commits mischief and 
thereby causes loss or damage to the amount of fifty rupees or upwards, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
428. Mischief by killing or maiming animal of the value of ten rupees.—Whoever commits 
mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless any animal or animals of the value of the ten 
rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
429. Mischief by killing or maiming cattle, etc., of any value or any animal of the value of fifty 
rupees.—Whoever commits mischief by killing, poisoning, maiming or rendering useless, any elephant, 
camel, horse, mule, buffalo, bull, cow or ox, whatever may be the value thereof, or any other animal of 
the value of fifty rupees or upwards, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 
430. Mischief by injury to works of irrigation or by wrongfully diverting water.—Whoever 
commits mischief by doing any act which causes, or which he knows to be likely to cause, a diminution 
of the supply of water for agricultural purposes, or for food or drink for human beings or for animals 
which are property, or for cleanliness or for carrying on any manufacture, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 
431. Mischief by injury to public road, bridge, river or channel.—Whoever commits mischief by 
doing any act which renders or which he knows to be likely to render any public road, bridge, navigable 
river or navigable channel, natural or artificial, impassable or less safe for travelling or conveying 
property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
432. Mischief by causing inundation or obstruction to public drainage attended with damage.—
Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which causes or which he knows to be likely to cause an 
inundation or an obstruction to any public drainage attended with injury or damage, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
433. Mischief by destroying, moving or rendering less useful a light-house or sea-mark.—
Whoever commits mischief by destroying or moving any light-house or other light used as a sea-mark, or 
any sea- mark or buoy or other thing placed as a guide for navigators, or by any act which renders any 
such light-house, sea-mark, buoy or other such thing as aforesaid less useful as a guide for navigators, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or 
with fine, or with both. 

98 
 
434. Mischief by destroying or moving, etc., a land-mark fixed by public authority.—Whoever 
commits mischief by destroying or moving any land-mark fixed by the authority of a public servant, or by 
any act which renders such land-mark less useful as such, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
435. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to cause damage to amount of one 
hundred or (in case of agricultural produce) ten rupees.—Whoever commits mischief by fire or any 
explosive substance intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, damage to 
any property to the amount of one hundred rupees or upwards 1[or (where the property is agricultural 
produce) ten rupees or upwards], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
436. Mischief by fire or explosive substance with intent to destroy house, etc.—Whoever commits 
mischief by fire or any explosive substance, intending to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will 
thereby cause, the destruction of any building which is ordinarily used as a place of worship or as a 
human dwelling or as a place for the custody of property, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], 
or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
437. Mischief with intent to destroy or make unsafe a decked vessel or one of twenty tons 
burden.—Whoever commits mischief to any decked vessel or any vessel of a burden of twenty tons or 
upwards, intending to destroy or render unsafe, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby destroy or 
render unsafe, that vessel, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
438. Punishment for the mischief described in section 437 committed by fire or explosive 
substance. —Whoever commits, or attempts to commit, by fire or any explosive substance, such mischief 
as is described in the last preceding section, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life]. or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
439. Punishment for intentionally running vessel aground or ashore with intent to commit theft, 
etc.—Whoever intentionally runs any vessel aground or ashore, intending to commit theft of any property 
contained therein or to dishonestly misappropriate any such property, or with intent that such theft or 
misappropriation of property may be committed, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
440. Mischief committed after preparation made for causing death or hurt.—Whoever commits 
mischief, having made preparation for causing to any person death, or hurt, or wrongful restraint, or fear 
of death, or of hurt, or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Of Criminal Trespass 
441. Criminal trespass.—Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with 
intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property,  
or having lawfully entered into or upon such property, unlawfully remains there with intent thereby to 
intimidate, insult or annoy any such person, or with intent to commit an offence,  
is said to commit “criminal trespass”. 
442. House-trespass.—Whoever commits criminal trespass by entering into or remaining in any 
building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or any building used as a place for worship, or as a 
place for the custody of property, is said to commit “house-trespass”. 
Explanation.—The introduction of any part of the criminal trespasser's body is entering sufficient to 
constitute house-trespass. 
 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 8 of 1882, s. 10 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

99 
 
443. Lurking house-trespass.—Whoever commits house-trespass having taken precautions to 
conceal such house-trespass from some person who has a right to exclude or eject the trespasser from the 
building, tent or vessel which is the subject of the trespass, is said to commit “lurking house-trespass”. 
444. Lurking house-trespass by night.—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass after sunset and 
before sunrise, is said to commit “lurking house-trespass by night”. 
445. House-breaking.—A person is said to commit “house-breaking” who commits house-trespass if 
he effects his entrance into the house or any part of it in any of the six ways hereinafter described; or if, 
being in the house or any part of it for the purpose of committing an offence, or having committed an 
offence therein, he quits the house or any part of it in any of such six ways, that is to say:— 
First.—If he enters or quits through a passage made by himself, or by any abettor of the house-
trespass, in order to the committing of the house-trespass. 
Secondly.—If he enters or quits through any passage not intended by any person, other than himself 
or an abettor of the offence, for human entrance; or through any passage to which he has obtained access 
by scaling or climbing over any wall or building. 
Thirdly.—If he enters or quits through any passage which he or any abettor of the house-trespass has 
opened, in order to the committing of the house-trespass by any means by which that passage was not 
intended by the occupier of the house to be opened. 
Fourthly.—If he enters or quits by opening any lock in order to the committing of the house-trespass, 
or in order to the quitting of the house after a house-trespass. 
Fifthly.—If he effects his entrance or departure by using criminal force or committing an assault, or 
by threatening any person with assault. 
Sixthly.—If he enters or quits by any passage which he knows to have been fastened against such 
entrance or departure, and to have been unfastened by himself or by an abettor of the house-trespass. 
Explanation.—Any out-house or building occupied with a house, and between which and such house 
there is an immediate internal communication, is part of the house within the meaning of this section. 
Illustrations 
(a) A commits house-trespass by making a hole through the wall of Z's house, and putting his hand through the aperture. 
This is house- breaking. 
(b) A commits house-trespass by creeping into a ship at a port- hole between decks. This is house-breaking. 
(c) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through a window. This is house-breaking. 
(d) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the door, having opened a door which was fastened. This is 
house-breaking. 
(e) A commits house-trespass by entering Z's house through the door, having lifted a latch by putting a wire through a hole 
in the door. This is house-breaking. 
(f) A finds the key of Z's house door, which Z had lost, and commits house-trespass by entering Z's house, having opened 
the door with that key. This is house-breaking. 
(g) Z is standing in his doorway. A forces a passage by knocking Z down, and commits house-trespass by entering the 
house. This is house-breaking. 
(h) Z, the door-keeper of Y, is standing in Y's doorway. A commits house-trespass by entering the house, having deterred Z 
from opposing him by threatening to beat him. This is house-breaking. 
446. House-breaking by night.—Whoever commits house-breaking after sunset and before sunrise, 
is said to commit “house-breaking by night”. 
447. Punishment for criminal trespass.—Whoever commits criminal trespass shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
448. Punishment for house-trespass.—Whoever commits house-trespass shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 

100 
 
449. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with death.—Whoever commits 
house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable with death, shall be punished with 
1[imprisonment for life], or with rigorous imprisonment for a term not exceeding ten years, and shall also 
be liable to fine. 
450. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment for life.—
Whoever commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable with 
1[imprisonment for life], shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term not 
exceeding ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
451. House-trespass in order to commit offence punishable with imprisonment.—Whoever 
commits house-trespass in order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and shall 
also be liable to fine; and if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment 
may be extended to seven years. 
452. House-trespass alter preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint.—Whoever 
commits house-trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any 
person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting and person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or 
of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
453. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking.—Whoever commits lurking 
house-trespass or house-breaking, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
454. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking in order to commit offence punishable with 
imprisonment.—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, in order to the committing 
of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the offence intended to 
be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended to ten years. 
455. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful 
restraint.—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass, or house-breaking, having made preparation for 
causing hurt to any person, or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully restraining any person, or for 
putting any person in fear of hurt or of assault or of wrongful restraint, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description or a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
456. Punishment for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night.—Whoever commits 
lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
457. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night in order to commit offence punishable 
with imprisonment.—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, in 
order to the committing of any offence punishable with imprisonment, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, and shall also be liable to 
fine; and, if the offence intended to be committed is theft, the term of the imprisonment may be extended 
to fourteen years. 
458. Lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night after preparation for hurt, assault, or 
wrongful restraint.—Whoever commits lurking house-trespass by night, or house-breaking by night, 
having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any person, or for wrongfully 
restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful restraint, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to fourteen years, 
and shall also be liable to fine. 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

101 
 
459. Grievous hurt caused whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking.—
Whoever, whilst committing lurking house-trespass or house-breaking, causes grievous hurt to any person 
or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, shall be punished with 1[imprisonment for life], 
or imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
460. All persons jointly concerned in lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night 
punishable where death or grievous hurt caused by one of them.—If, at the time of the committing of 
lurking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by night, any person guilty of such offence shall 
voluntarily cause or attempt to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, every person jointly concerned 
in committing such lurkking house-trespass by night or house-breaking by night, shall be punished with 
1[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
461. Dishonestly breaking open receptacle containing property.—Whoever dishonestly or with 
intent to commit mischief, breaks open or unfastens any closed receptacle which contains or which he 
believes to contain property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
462. Punishment for same offence when committed by person entrusted with custody.—
Whoever, being entrusted with any closed receptacle which contains or which he believes to contain 
property, without having authority to open the same, dishonestly, or with intent to commit mischief, 
breaks open or unfastens that receptacle, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XVIII 
OF OFFENCES RELATING TO DOCUMENTSAND TO2*** PROPERTY MARKS 
463. Forgery.—3[Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record or part of a 
document or electronic record, with intent to cause damage or injury], to the public or to any person, or to 
support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with property, or to enter into any express or 
implied contract, or with intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits forgery. 
464. Making a false document.—3[A person is said to make a false document or false electronic 
record— 
First.—Who dishonestly or fraudulently— 
(a) makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part of a document; 
(b) makes or transmits any electronic record or part of any electronic record; 
(c) affixes any 4[electronic signature] on any electronic record; 
(d) makes any mark denoting the execution of a document or the authenticity of the 
4[electronic signature], 
with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document or part of document, electronic 
record or 4[electronic signature] was made, signed, sealed, executed, transmitted or affixed by or by the 
authority of a person by whom or by whose authority he knows that it was not made, singed, sealed, 
executed or affixed; or 
Secondly.—Who without lawful authority, dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation or otherwise, 
alters a document or an electronic record in any material part thereof, after it has been made, executed or 
affixed with 4[electronic signature] either by himself or by any other person, whether such person be 
living or dead at the time of such alteration; or 
Thirdly.—Who dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, seal, execute or alter a 
document or an electronic record or to affix his 4[electronic signature] on any electronic record knowing 
that such person by reason of unsoundness of mind or intoxication cannot, or that by reason of deception 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
2. The words “TRADE OR” omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and Sch. (w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
4. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 

102 
 
practised upon him, he does not know the contents of the document or electronic record or the nature of 
the alteration.] 
Illustrations 
(a) A has a letter of credit upon B for rupees 10,000, written by Z. A, in order to defraud B, adds cipher to the 10,000, and 
makes the sum 1,00,000 intending that it may be believed by B that Z so wrote the letter. A has committed forgery.  
(b) A, without Z's authority, affixes Z's seal to a document purporting to be a conveyance of an estate from Z to A, with the 
intention of selling the estate to B and thereby of obtaining from B the purchase-money. A has committed forgery. 
(c) A picks up a cheque on a banker signed by B, payable to bearer, but without any sum having been inserted in the cheque. 
A fraudulently fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of ten thousand rupees. A commits forgery. 
(d) A leaves with B, his agent, a cheque on a banker, signed by A, without inserting the sum payable and authorizes B to fill 
up the cheque by inserting a sum not exceeding ten thousand rupees for the purpose of making certain payments. B fraudulently 
fills up the cheque by inserting the sum of twenty thousand rupees. B commits forgery. 
(e) A draws a bill of exchange on himself in the name of B without B's authority, intending to discount it as a genuine bill 
with a banker and intending to take up the bill on its maturity. Here, as A draws the bill with intent to deceive the banker by 
leading him to suppose that he had the security of B, and thereby to discount the bill, A is guilty of forgery. 
(f) Z's will contains these words—“I direct that all my remaining property be equally divided between A, B and C.” A 
dishonestly scratches out B's name, intending that it may be believed that the whole was left to himself and C. A has committed 
forgery. 
(g) A endorses a Government promissory note and makes it payable to Z or his order by writing on the bill the words “Pay 
to Z or his order” and signing the endorsement. B dishonestly erases the words “Pay to Z or his order”, and thereby converts the 
special endorsement into a blank endorsement. B commits forgery. 
(h) A sells and conveys an estate to Z. A afterwards, in order to defraud Z of his estate, executes a conveyance of the same 
estate to B, dated six months earlier than the date of the conveyance to Z, intending it to be believed that he had conveyed the 
estate to B before he conveyed it to Z. A has committed forgery. 
(i) Z dictates his will to A. A intentionally writes down a different legatee named by Z, and by representing to Z that he has 
prepared the will according to his instructions, induces Z to sign the will. A has committed forgery. 
(j) A writes a letter and signs it with B's name without B's authority, certifying that A is a man of good character and in 
distressed circumstances from unforeseen misfortune, intending by means of such letter to obtain alms from Z and other persons. 
Here, as A made a false document in order to induce Z to part with property, A has committed forgery. 
(k) A without B's authority writes a letter and signs it in B's name certifying to A's character, intending thereby to obtain 
employment under Z. A has committed forgery inasmuch as he intended to deceive Z by the forged certificate, and thereby to 
induce Z to enter into an express or implied contract for service. 
Explanation 1.—A man’s signature of his own name may amount to forgery. 
Illustrations 
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may be believed that the bill was drawn by another person 
of the same name. A has committed forgery. 
(b) A writes the word “accepted” on a piece of paper and signs it with Z's name, in order that B may afterwards write on the 
paper a bill of exchange drawn by B upon Z, and negotiate the bill as though it had been accepted by Z. A is guilty of forgery; 
and if B, knowing the fact, draws the bill upon the paper pursuant to A's intention, B is also guilty of forgery. 
(c) A picks up a bill of exchange payable to the order of a different person of the same name. A endorses the bill in his own 
name, intending to cause it to be believed that it was endorsed by the person to whose order it was payable; here A has committed 
forgery. 
(d) A purchases an estate sold under execution of a decree against B. B, after the seizure of the estate, in collusion with Z, 
executes a lease of the estate, to Z at a nominal rent and for a long period and dates the lease six months prior to the seizure, with 
intent to defraud A, and to cause it to be believed that the lease was granted before the seizure. B, though he executes the lease in 
his own name, commits forgery by antedating it. 
(e) A, a trader, in anticipation of insolvency, lodges effects with B for A's benefit, and with intent to defraud his creditors; 
and in order to give a colour to the transaction, writes a promissory note binding himself to pay to B a sum for value received, 
and antedates the note, intending that it may be believed to have been made before A was on the point of insolvency. A has 
committed forgery under the first head of the definition. 
Explanation 2.—The making of a false document in the name of a fictious person, intending it to be 
believed that the document was made by a real person, or in the name of a deceased person, intending it to 
be believed that the document was made by the person in his lifetime, may amount to forgery. 
 
 

103 
 
Illustration 
A draws a bill of exchange upon a fictious person, and fraudulently accepts the bill in the name of such fictitious person with 
intent to negotiate it. A commits forgery. 
1[Explanation 3.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “affixing 2[electronic signature]” 
shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).] 
465. Punishment for forgery.—Whoever commits forgery shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
466. Forgery of record of Court or of public register, etc.—3[Whoever forges a document or an 
electronic record], purporting to be a record or proceeding of or in a Court of Justice, or a register of birth, 
baptism, marriage or burial, or a register kept by a public servant as such, or a certificate or document 
purporting to be made by a public servant in his official capacity, or an authority to institute or defend a 
suit, or to take any proceedings therein, or to confess judgment, or a power of attorney, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
1[Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "register" includes any list, data or record of any 
entries maintained in the electronic form as defined in clause (r) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).] 
467. Forgery of valuable security, will, etc.—Whoever forges a document which purports to be a 
valuable security or a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or which purports to give authority to any 
person to make or transfer any valuable security, or to receive the principal, interest or dividends thereon, 
or to receive or deliver any money, movable property, or valuable security, or any document purporting to 
be an acquittance or receipt acknowledging the payment of money, or an acquittance or receipt for the 
delivery of any movable property or valuable security, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for life], or 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
468. Forgery for purpose of cheating.—Whoever commits forgery, intending that the 3[document or 
electronic record forged] shall be used for the purpose of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment 
of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
469. Forgery for purpose of harming reputation.—Whoever commits forgery, 3[intending that the 
document or electronic record forged] shall harm the reputation of any party, or knowing that it is likely 
to be used for that purpose, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
470. Forged document.—A false 5[document or electronic record] made wholly or in part by forgery 
is designated “a forged 5[document or electronic record]”. 
471. Using as genuine a forged document or electronic record.—Whoever fraudulently or 
dishonestly uses as genuine any 5[document or electronic record] which he knows or has reason to believe 
to be a forged 5[document or electronic record], shall be punished in the same manner as if he had forged 
such 5[document or electronic record]. 
472. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery punishable under 
section 467.—Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an 
impression, intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery which would 
be punishable under section 467 of this Code, or, with such intent, has in his possession any such seal, 
plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with 4[imprisonment for 
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall 
also be liable to fine. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch. (w.e.f. 17-10-2000).  
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 51, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27-10-2009). 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
4. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “document” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 

104 
 
473. Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery punishable 
otherwise.—Whoever makes or counterfeits any seal, plate or other instrument for making an impression, 
intending that the same shall be used for the purpose of committing any forgery which would be 
punishable under any section of this Chapter other than section 467, or, with such intent, has in his 
possession any such seal, plate or other instrument, knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
474. Having possession of document described in section 466 or 467, knowing it to be forged and 
intending to use it genuine.—1[Whoever has in his possession any document or electronic record, 
knowing the same to be forged and intending that the same shall fraudulently or dishonestly be used as 
genuine, shall, if the document or electronic record is one of the description mentioned in section 466 of 
this Code], be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if the document is one of the description mentioned in section 
467, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description, for a 
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
475. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents described in section 467, 
or possessing counterfeit marked material.—Whoever counterfeits upon, or in the substance of, any 
material, any device or mark used for the purpose of authenticating any document described in section 
467 of this Code, intending that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the 
appearance of authenticity to any document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or 
who, with such intent, has in his possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such 
device or mark has been counterfeited, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
476. Counterfeiting device or mark used for authenticating documents other than those 
described in section 467, or possessing counterfeit marked material.—Whoever counterfeits upon, or 
in the substance of, any material, any device or mark used for the purpose of authenticating 3[any 
document or electronic record] other than the documents described in section 467 of this Code, intending 
that such device or mark shall be used for the purpose of giving the appearance of authenticity to any 
document then forged or thereafter to be forged on such material, or who with such intent, has in his 
possession any material upon or in the substance of which any such device or mark has been 
counterfeited, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
477. Fraudulent cancellation, destruction, etc., of will, authority to adopt, or valuable 
security.—Whoever fraudulently or dishonestly, or with intent to cause damage or injury to the public or 
to any person, cancels, destroys or defaces, or attempts to cancel, destroy or deface, or secretes or 
attempts to secrete any document which is or purports to be a will, or an authority to adopt a son, or any 
valuable security, or commits mischief in respect of such document, shall be punished with 
2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
4[477A. Falsification of accounts.—Whoever, being a clerk, officer or servant, or employed or 
acting in the capacity of a clerk, officer or servant, wilfully, and with intent to defraud, destroys, alters, 
mutilates or falsifies any 5[book, electronic record, paper, writing] valuable security or account which 
belongs to or is in the possession of his employer, or has been received by him for or on behalf of his 
employer, or wilfully, and with intent to defraud, makes or abets the making of any false entry in, or 
omits or alters or abets the omission or alteration of any material particular from or in. any such 5[book, 
electronic record, paper, writing] valuable security or account, shall be punished with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for certain words (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “any document” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 
4. Added by Act 3 of 1895, s. 4. 
5. Subs. by Act 21 of 2000, s. 91 and the First Sch., for “book, paper, writing” (w.e.f. 17-10-2000). 

105 
 
Explanation.—It shall be sufficient in any charge under this section to allege a general intent to 
defraud without naming any particular person intended to be defrauded or specifying any particular sum 
of money intended to be the subject of the fraud, or any particular day on which the offence was 
committed.]  
1[Of 2***Property and Other Marks 
478. [Trade Mark.] Rep. by the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958), s. 135 and 
Sch. (w. e. f. 25-11-1959). 
479. Property mark.—A mark used for denoting that movable property belongs to a particular 
person is called a property mark. 
480. [Using a false trade mark.] Rep. by the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958), s. 
135and Sch. (w.e.f. 25- 11-1959). 
481. Using a false property mark.—Whoever marks any movable property or goods or any case, 
package or other receptacle containing movable property or goods, or uses any case, package or other 
receptacle having any mark thereon, in a manner reasonably calculated to cause it to be believed that the 
property or goods so marked, or any property or goods contained in any such receptacle so marked, 
belong to a person to whom they do not belong, is said to use a false property mark. 
482. Punishment for using a false property mark.—Whoever uses 3***any false property mark 
shall, unless he proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
483. Counterfeiting a property mark used by another.—Whoever counterfeits any 4***property 
mark used by any other person shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
484. Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant.—Whoever counterfeits any property mark 
used by a public servant, or any mark used by a public servant to denote that any property has been 
manufactured by a particular person or at a particular time or place, or that the property is of a particular 
quality or has passed through a particular office, or that it is entitled to any exemption, or uses as genuine 
any such mark knowing the same to be counterfeit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
5[485. Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark.—Whoever 
makes or has in his possession any die, plate or other instrument for the purpose of counterfeiting a 
property mark, or has in his possession a property mark for the purpose of denoting that any goods belong 
to a person to whom they do not belong, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.] 
486. Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark.—6[Whoever sells, or exposes, or has 
has in possession for sale, any goods or things with a counterfeit property mark] affixed to or impressed 
upon the same or to or upon any case, package or other receptacle in which such goods are contained, 
shall, unless he proves 
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence against this section, he 
had at the time of the commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the genuineness of the mark, 
and 
(b) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his power 
with respect to the persons from whom he obtained such goods or things, or 
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently, 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1889, s. 3, for the original heading and ss. 478 to 489. 
2. The word “Trade” omitted by Act 43 of 1958, s. 135 and the Sch. (w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
3. The words “any false trade mark or” omitted by s. 135 and the Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
4. The words “trade mark or” omitted by s. 135 and the Sch., ibid. (w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
5. Subs. by s. 135 and the Sch., ibid., for s. 485 (w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 
6. Subs. by s. 135 and the Sch., ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 25-11-1959). 

106 
 
be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
fine, or with both. 
487. Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods.—Whoever makes any false 
mark upon any case, package or other receptacle containing goods, in a manner reasonably calculated to 
cause any public servant or any other person to believe that such receptacle contains goods which it does 
not contain or that it does not contain goods which it does contain, or that the goods contained in such 
receptacle are of a nature or quality different from the real nature or quality thereof, shall, unless he 
proves that he acted without intent to defraud, be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
488. Punishment for making use of any such false mark.—Whoever makes use of any such false 
mark in any manner prohibited by the last foregoing section shall, unless he proves that he acted without 
intent to defraud, be punished as if he had committed an offence against that section. 
489. Tampering with property mark with intent to cause injury.—Whoever removes, destroys, 
defaces or adds to any property mark, intending or knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause 
injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.] 
1[Of Currency-Notes and Bank-Notes 
489A. Counterfeiting currency-notes or bank-notes.—Whoever counterfeits, or knowingly 
performs any part of the process of counterfeiting, any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with 
2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and of sections 489B, 3[489C, 489D and 489E], the 
expression “bank-note” means a promissory note or engagement for the payment of money to bearer on 
demand issued by any person carrying on the business of banking in any part of the world, or issued by or 
under the authority of any State or Sovereign Power, and intended to be used as equivalent to, or as a 
substitute for money. 
489B. Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes.—Whoever sells to, 
or buys or receives from, any other person, or otherwise traffics in or uses as genuine, any forged or 
counterfeit currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be forged or 
counterfeit, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of either description for 
a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
489C. Possession of forged or counterfeit currency-notes or bank-notes.—Whoever has in his 
possession any forged or counterfeit currency-note or bank-note, knowing or having reason to believe the 
same to be forged or counterfeit and intending to use the same as genuine or that it may be used as 
genuine, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven 
years, or with fine, or with both. 
489D. Making or possessing instruments or materials for forging or counterfeiting currency 
notes or bank-notes.—Whoever makes, or performs any part of the process of making, or buys or sells 
or disposes of, or has in his possession, any machinery, instrument or material for the purpose of being 
used, or knowing or having reason to believe that it is intended to be used, for forging or counterfeiting 
any currency-note or bank-note, shall be punished with 2[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment of 
either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.] 
4[489E. Making or using documents resembling currency-notes or bank-notes.—(1) Whoever 
makes, or causes to be made, or uses for any purpose whatsoever, or delivers to any person, any document 
purporting to be, or in any way resembling, or so nearly resembling as to be calculated to deceive, any 
currency-note or bank-note shall be punished with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 12 of 1899, s. 2. 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation for life” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. Subs. by Act 35 of 1950, s. 3 and the Second Sch., for “489C and 489D”. 
4. Ins. by Act 6 of 1943, s. 2. 

107 
 
(2) If any person, whose name appears on a document the making of which is an offence under  
sub-section (1), refuses, without lawful excuse, to disclose to a police-officer on being so required the 
name and address of the person by whom it was printed or otherwise made, he shall be punished with fine 
which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
(3) Where the name of any person appears on any document in respect of which any person is 
charged with an offence under sub- section (1) or on any other document used or distributed in connection 
with that document it may, until the contrary is proved, be presumed that that person caused the document 
to be made.] 
CHAPTER XIX 
OFTHE CRIMINAL BREACHOF CONTRACTSOF SERVICE 
490. [Breach of contract of service during voyage or journey.] Rep. by the Workmen's Breach of 
Contract (Repealing) Act, 1925 (3 of 1925), s. 2 and Sch. 
491. Breach of contract to attend on and supply wants of helpless person.—Whoever, being 
bound by a lawful contract to attend on or to supply the wants of any person who, by reason of youth, or 
of unsoundness of mind, or of a disease or bodily weakness, is helpless or incapable of providing for his 
own safety or of supplying his own wants, voluntarily omits so to do, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both. 
492. [Breach of contract to serve at distant place to which servant is conveyed at master's expense.] 
Rep. by the Workmen's Breach of Contract (Repealing) Act,1925 (3 of 1925), s. 2 and Sch. 
CHAPTER XX 
OFOFFENCES RELATINGTO MARRIAGE 
493. Cohabitation caused by a man deceitfully inducing a belief of lawful marriage.—Every man 
who by deceit causes any woman who is not lawfully married to him to believe that she is lawfully 
married to him and to cohabit or have sexual intercourse with him in that belief, shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
494. Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife.—Whoever, having a husband or wife 
living, marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of 
such husband or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
Exception.—This section does not extend to any person whose marriage with such husband or wife 
has been declared void by a Court of competent jurisdiction, 
nor to any person who contracts a marriage during the life of a former husband or wife, if such 
husband or wife, at the time of the subsequent marriage, shall have been continually absent from such 
person for the space of seven years, and shall not have been heard of by such person as being alive within 
that time provided the person contracting such subsequent marriage shall, before such marriage takes 
place, inform the person with whom such marriage is contracted of the real state of facts so far as the 
same are within his or her knowledge. 
495. Same offence with concealment of former marriage from person with whom subsequent 
marriage is contracted.—Whoever commits the offence defined in the last preceding section having 
concealed from the person with whom the subsequent marriage is contracted, the fact of the former 
marriage, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine. 
496. Marriage ceremony fraudulently gone through without lawful marriage.—Whoever, 
dishonestly or with a fraudulent intention, goes through the ceremony of being married, knowing that he 
is not thereby lawfully married, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 
which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine. 

108 
 
497. Adultery.—Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person who is and whom he knows or has 
reason to believe to be the wife of another man, without the consent or connivance of that man, such 
sexual intercourse not amounting to the offence of rape, is guilty of the offence of adultery, and shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, 
or with both. In such case the wife shall not be punishable as an abettor. 
498. Enticing or taking away or detaining with criminal intent a married woman.—Whoever 
takes or entices away any woman who is and whom he knows or has reason to believe to be the wife of 
any other man, from that man, or from any person having the care of her on behalf of that man, with 
intent that she may have illicit intercourse with any person, or conceals or detains with that intent any 
such woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both. 
1[CHAPTER XXA 
OF CRUELTY BY HUSBANDOR RELATIVESOF HUSBAND 
498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.—Whoever, being 
the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “cruelty” means— 
(a) anywilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide 
or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; 
or 
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person 
related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of 
failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.] 
CHAPTER XXI 
OF DEFAMATION 
499. Defamation.—Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible 
representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing 
or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except 
in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. 
Explanation 1.—It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the 
imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the fellings 
of his family or other near relatives. 
Explanation 2.—It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an 
association or collection of persons as such. 
Explanation 3.—An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to 
defamation. 
Explanation 4.—No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly 
or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or 
lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that 
person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a lothsome state, or in a state generally 
considered as disgraceful. 
Illustrations 
(a) A says— “Z is an honest man; he never stole B's watch”; intending to cause it to be believed that Z did steal B's watch. 
This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
(b) A is asked who stole B's watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed that Z stole B's watch. This is 
defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 2. 

109 
 
(c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B's watch, intending it to be believed that Z stole B's watch. This is 
defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. 
First Exception.—Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published.—It 
is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good that 
the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact. 
Second Exception.—Public conduct of public servants.—It is not defamation to express in good 
faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public 
functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. 
Third Exception.—Conduct of any person touching any public question.—It is not defamation to 
express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of any person touching any public 
question, and respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. 
Illustration 
It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever resepting Z's conduct in petitioning Government on a 
public question, in signing a requisition for a meeting on a public question, in presiding or attending at such meeting, in forming 
or joining any society which invites the public support, in voting or canvassing for a particular candidate for any situation in the 
efficient discharge of the duties of which the public is interested. 
Fourth Exception.—Publication of reports of proceedings of courts.—It is not defamation to 
publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such 
proceedings. 
Explanation.—A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an enquiry in open Court preliminary to 
a trial in a Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of the above section. 
Fifth Exception.—Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and others 
concerned.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of 
any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any 
person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as 
his character appears in that conduct, and no further. 
 
 Illustrations 
(a) A says—“I think Z's evidence on that trial is so contradictory that he must be stupid or dishonest.” A is within this 
exception if he says this in good faith, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses respects Z's character as it appears in Z's 
conduct as a witness, and no farther. 
(b) But if A says—“I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to be a man without veracity”; A is not 
within this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which express of Z's character, is an opinion not founded on Z's conduct as a 
witness. 
Sixth Exception.—Merits of public performance.—It is not defamation to express in good faith any 
opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of the 
public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his character appears in such performance, and 
no further. 
Explanation.—A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly or by acts on 
the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public. 
Illustrations 
(a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public. 
(b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of the public. 
(c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or singing to the judgment of the public. 
(d) A says of a book published by Z—“Z’s book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z's book is indecent; Z must be a man 
of impure mind.” A is within the exception, if he says this in good faith, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses of Z 
respects Z's character only so far as it appears in Z's book, and no further. 
(e) But if A says “I am not surprised that Z's book is foolish and indecent, for he is a weak man and a libertine.” A is not 
within this exception, inasmuch as the opinion which he expresses of Z's character is an opinion not founded on Z's book. 
Seventh Exception.—Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful authority over 
another.—It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferred by law or 

110 
 
arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the conduct of 
that other in matters to which such lawful authority relates. 
Illustration 
A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court; a head of a department censuring in 
good faith those who are under his orders, a parent censuring in good faith a child in the presence of other children; a 
schoolmaster, whose authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a pupil in the presence of other pupils; a master 
censuring a servant in good faith for remissness in service; a banker censuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for the 
conduct of such cashier as such cashier- are within this exception. 
Eighth Exception.—Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person.—It is not 
defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful 
authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation. 
Illustration 
If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a servant, to Z's master;if 
A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z's father-A is within this exception. 
Ninth Exception.—Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's 
interests.—It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the 
imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of any 
other person, or for the public good. 
Illustrations 
(a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business—“Sell nothing to Z unless he pays you ready money, for I have 
no opinion of his honesty.” A is within the exception, if he has made this imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of his 
own interests. 
(b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report to his own superior officer, casts an imputation on the character of Z. Here, if the 
imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good, A is within the exception. 
Tenth Exception.—Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for public good.—
It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another, provided that such 
caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some person in whom that 
person is interested, or for the public good. 
500. Punishment for defamation.—Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
501. Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory.—Whoever prints or engraves any 
matter, knowing or having good reason to believe that such matter is defamatory of any person, shall be 
punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 
502. Sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter.—Whoever sells or 
offers for sale any printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter, knowing that it contains 
such matter, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine, or with both. 
CHAPTER XXII 
OF CRIMINAL INTIMIDATION, INSULT AND ANNOYANCE 
503. Criminal intimidation.—Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or 
property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent to cause 
alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit 
to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such 
threat, commits criminal intimidation. 
Explanation.—A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom the person threatened 
is interested, is within this section. 
Illustration 
A, for the purpose of inducing B to resist from prosecuting a civil suit, threatens to burn B's house. A is guilty of criminal 
intimidation. 

111 
 
504. Intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of the peace.—Whoever intentionally 
insults, and thereby gives provocation to any person, intending or knowing it to be likely that such 
provocation will cause him to break the public peace, or to commit any other offence, shall be punished 
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with 
both. 
1[505. Statements conducing to public mischief.—2[(1)] Whoever makes, publishes or circulates 
any statement, rumour or report,— 
(a) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, any officer, soldier, 3[sailor or airman] in the 
Army, 4[Navy or Air Force] 5[of India] to mutiny or otherwise disregard or fail in his duty as such; or  
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public, or to any section 
of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence against the State or against 
the public tranquility; or 
(c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of persons to commit 
any offence against any other class or community, 
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to 6[three years], or with fine, or with both. 
7[(2) Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between classes.—Whoever 
makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing rumour or alarming news with intent to 
create or promote, or which is likely to create or promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, 
residence, language, caste or community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-
will between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, shall be 
punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 
(3) Offence under sub-section (2) committed in place of worship, etc.—Whoever commits an 
offence specified in sub-section (2) in any place of worship or in any assembly engaged in the 
performance of religious worship or religious ceremonies, shall be punished with imprisonment which 
may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine.] 
Exception.—It does not amount to an offence, within the meaning of this section, when the person 
making, publishing or circulating any such statement, rumour or report, has reasonable grounds for 
believing that such statement, rumour or report is true and makes, publishes or circulates it 2[in good faith 
and] without any such intent as aforesaid.] 
506. Punishment for criminal intimidation.—Whoever commits the offence of criminal 
intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both; 
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc.—and if the threat be to cause death or grievous 
hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death or 
8[imprisonment for life], or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or to impute 
unchastity to a woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both. 
507. Criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication.—Whoever commits the offence of 
criminal intimidation by an anonymous communication, or having taken precaution to conceal the name 
or abode of the person from whom the threat comes, shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to two years, in addition to the punishment provided for the 
offence by the last preceding section. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1898, s. 6, for s. 505. 
2. Section 505 re-numbered as sub-section (1) of that section by Act 35 of 1969, s. 3. 
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 1927, s. 2 and the First Sch., for “or sailor”. 
4. Subs. by s. 2 and the First Sch., ibid., for “or Navy”. 
5. Subs. by the A. O. 1950, for “of Her Majesty or in the Imperial Service Troops” The words “or in the Royal Indian Marine” 
occurring after the word “Majesty” omitted by Act 35 of 1934, s. 2 and Sch. 
6. Subs. by Act 41 of 1961, s. 4, for “two years”. 
7. Ins. by Act 35 of 1969, s. 3. 
8. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

112 
 
508. Act caused by inducing person to believe that he will be rendered an object of the Divine 
displeasure.—Whoever voluntarily causes or attempts to cause any person to do anything which that 
person is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do anything which he is legally entitled to do, by inducing 
or attempting to induce that person to believe that he or any person in whom he is interested will become 
or will be rendered by some act of the offender an object of Divine displeasure if he does not do the thing 
which it is the object of the offender to cause him to do, or if he does the thing which it is the object of the 
offender to cause him to omit, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which 
may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A sits dhurna at Z's door with the intention of causing it to be believed that, by so sitting, he renders Z an object of 
Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
(b) A threatens Z that, unless Z performs a certain act, A will kill one of A's own children, under such circumstances that the 
killing would be believed to render Z an object of Divine displeasure. A has committed the offence defined in this section. 
509. Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman.—Whoever, intending to 
insult the modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, 
intending that such word or sound shall be heard, or that such gesture or object shall be seen, by such 
woman, or intrudes upon the privacy of such woman, 1[shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, and also with fine]. 
510. Misconduct in public by a drunken person.—Whoever, in a state of intoxication, appears in 
any public place, or in any place which it is a trespass in him to enter, and there conducts himself in such 
a manner as to cause annoyance to any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to twenty-four hours, or with fine which may extend to ten rupees, or with both. 
CHAPTER XXIII 
OF ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OFFENCES 
511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment for life or 
other imprisonment.—Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable by this Code with 
2[imprisonment for life] or imprisonment, or to cause such an offence to be committed, and in such 
attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made by 
this Code for the punishment of such attempt, be punished with 3[imprisonment of any description 
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the imprisonment for life or, as the 
case may be, one- half of the longest term of imprisonment provided for that offence], or with such fine as 
is provided for the offence, or with both. 
Illustrations 
(a) A makes an attempt to steal some jewels by breaking open a box, and finds after so opening the box, that there is no 
jewel in it. He has done an act towards the commission of theft, and therefore is guilty under this section. 
(b) A makes an attempt to pick the pocket of Z by thrusting his hand into Z's pocket. A fails in the attempt in consequence of 
Z's having nothing in his pocket. A is guilty under this section. 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, s. 10, for “shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or 
with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 3-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1955, s. 117 and the Sch., for “transportation” (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 
3. Subs. by s. 117 and the Sch., ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1-1-1956). 

1 
 
THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988 
____________ 
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
____________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
2A. e-cart and e-rickshaw. 
 
CHAPTER II 
LICENSING OF DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
3. Necessity for driving licence. 
4. Age limit in connection with driving of motor vehicles. 
5. Responsibility of owners of motor vehicles for contravention of sections 3 and 4. 
6. Restrictions on the holding of driving licences. 
7. Restrictions on the granting of learner’s licences for certain vehicles. 
8. Grant of learner’s licence. 
9. Grant of driving licence. 
10. Form and contents of licences to drive. 
11. Additions to driving licence. 
12. Licensing and regulation of schools or establishments for imparting instruction in driving of 
motor vehicles. 
13. Extent of effectiveness of licences, to drive motor vehicles. 
14. Currency of licences to drive motor vehicles. 
15. Renewal of driving licences. 
16. Revocation of driving licence on grounds of disease or disability. 
17. Orders refusing or revoking driving licences and appeals therefrom. 
18. Driving Licences to drive motor vehicles, belonging to the Central Government. 
19. Power of licensing authority to disqualify from holding a driving licence or revoke such licence. 
20. Power of Court to disqualify. 
21. Suspension of driving licence in certain cases. 
22. Suspension or cancellation of driving licence on conviction. 
23. Effect of disqualification order. 
24. Endorsement. 
25. Transfer of endorsement and issue of driving licence free from endorsement. 
26. Maintenance of State Registers of Driving Licences. 
27. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
28. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
LICENSING OF CONDUCTORS OF STAGE CARRIAGES 
29. Necessity for conductor’s licence. 

2 
 
SECTIONS 
30. Grant of conductor’s licence. 
31. Disqualifications for the grant of conductor’s licence. 
32. Revocation of a conductor’s licence on grounds of disease or disability. 
33. Orders refusing, etc, conductor’s licences and appeals therefrom. 
34. Power of licensing authority to disqualify. 
35. Power of Court to disqualify. 
36. Certain provisions of Chapter II to apply to conductor’s licence. 
37. Savings. 
38. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
REGISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
39. Necessity for registration. 
40. Registration, where to be made. 
41. Registration, how to be made. 
42. Special provision for registration of motor vehicles of diplomatic officers, etc. 
43. Temporary registration. 
44. Production of vehicle at the time of registration. 
45. Refusal of registration or renewal of the certificate of registration. 
46. Effectiveness in India of registration. 
47. Assignment of new registration mark on removal to another State. 
48. No objection certificate. 
49. Change of residence or place of business. 
50. Transfer of ownership. 
51. Special provisions regarding motor vehicle subject to hire-purchase agreement, etc. 
52. Alteration in motor vehicle. 
53. Suspension of registration. 
54. Cancellation of registration suspended under section 53. 
55. Cancellation of registration. 
56. Certificate of fitness of transport vehicles. 
57. Appeals. 
58. Special provisions in regard to transport vehicles. 
59. Power to fix the age limit of motor vehicle. 
60. Registration of vehicles belonging to the Central Government. 
61. Application of Chapter to trailers. 
62. Information regarding stolen and recovered motor vehicles to be furnished by the police to the 
State Transport Authority. 
63. Maintenance of State Registers of Motor Vehicles. 
64. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
65. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
CONTROL OF TRANSPORT VEHICLES 
66. Necessity for permits. 
67. Power to State Government to control road transport. 

3 
 
SECTIONS 
68. Transport Authorities. 
69. General provision as to applications for permits. 
70. Application for stage carriage permit. 
71. Procedure of Regional Transport Authority in considering application for stage carriage permit. 
72. Grant of stage carriage permits. 
73. Application for contract carriage permit. 
74. Grant of contract carriage permit. 
75. Scheme for renting of motor cabs. 
76. Application for private service vehicle permit. 
77. Application for goods carriage permit. 
78. Consideration of application for goods carriage permit. 
79. Grant of goods carriage permit. 
80. Procedure in applying for and granting permits. 
81. Duration and renewal of permits. 
82. Transfer of permit. 
83. Replacement of vehicles. 
84. General conditions attaching to all permits. 
85. General form of permits. 
86. Cancellation and suspension of permits. 
87. Temporary permits. 
88. Validation of permits for use outside region in which granted. 
89. Appeals. 
90. Revision. 
91. Restriction of hours of work of drivers. 
92. Voidance of contracts restrictive of liability. 
93. Agent or canvasser to obtain licence. 
94. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts. 
95. Power of State Government to make rules as to stage carriages and contract carriages. 
96. Power of State Government to make rules for the purposes of this Chapter. 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS 
97. Definition. 
98. Chapter to override Chapter V and other laws. 
99. Preparation and publication of proposal regarding road transport service of a State transport 
undertaking. 
100. Objection to the proposal. 
101. Operation of additional services by a State transport undertaking in certain circumstances. 
102. Cancellation or modification of scheme. 
103. Issue of permits to State transport undertakings. 
104. Restriction on grant of permits in respect of a notified area or notified route. 
105. Principles and method of determining compensation and payment thereof. 
106. Disposal of article found in vehicles. 
107. Power of State Government to make rules. 
108. Certain powers of State Government exercisable by the Central Government. 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER VII 
CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
SECTIONS 
109. General provision regarding construction and maintenance of vehicles. 
110. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
111. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
CONTROL OF TRAFFIC 
112. Limits of speed. 
113. Limits of weight and limitations on use. 
114. Power to have vehicle weighed. 
115. Power to restrict the use of vehicles. 
116. Power to erect traffic signs. 
117. Parking places and halting stations. 
118. Driving regulations. 
119. Duty to obey traffic signs. 
120. Vehicles with left hand control. 
121. Signals and signalling devices. 
122. Leaving vehicle in dangerous position. 
123. Riding on running board, etc. 
124. Prohibition against travelling without pass or ticket. 
125. Obstruction of driver. 
126. Stationary vehicles. 
127. Removal of motor vehicles abandoned or left unattended on a public place. 
128. Safety measures for drivers and pillion riders. 
129. Wearing of protective headgear. 
130. Duty to produce licence and certificate of registration. 
131. Duty of the driver to take certain precautions at unguarded railway level crossing. 
132. Duty of driver to stop in certain cases. 
133. Duty of owner of motor vehicle to give information. 
134. Duty of driver in case of accident and injury to a person. 
135. Schemes to be framed for the investigation of accident cases and wayside amenities, etc. 
136. Inspection of vehicle involved in accident. 
137. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
138. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
 
CHAPTER IX 
MOTOR VEHICLES TEMPORARILY LEAVING OR VISITING INDIA 
139. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
 
 
 
 

5 
 
CHAPTER X 
LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT IN CERTAIN CASES 
SECTIONS 
140. Liability to pay compensation in certain cases on the principle of no fault. 
141. Provisions as to other right to claim compensation for death or permanent disablement. 
142. Permanent disablement. 
143. Applicability of Chapter to certain claims under Act 8 of 1923. 
144. Overriding effect. 
 
CHAPTER XI 
INSURANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS 
145. Definitions. 
146. Necessity for insurance against third party risk. 
147. Requirements of policies and limits of liability. 
148. Validity of policies of insurance issued in reciprocating countries. 
149. Duty of insurers to satisfy judgments and awards against persons insured in respect of third party 
risks. 
150. Rights of third parties against insurers on insolvency of the insured. 
151. Duty to give information as to insurance. 
152. Settlement between insurers and insured persons. 
153. Saving in respect of sections 150, 151 and 152. 
154. Insolvency of insured persons not to affect liability of insured or claims by third parties. 
155. Effect of death on certain causes of action. 
156. Effect of certificate of insurance. 
157. Transfer of certificate of insurance. 
158. Production of certain certificates, licence and permit in certain cases. 
159. Production of certificate of Insurance on application for authority to use vehicle. 
160. Duty to furnish particulars of vehicle involved in accident. 
161. Special provisions as to compensation in case of hit and run motor accident. 
162. Refund in certain cases of compensation paid under section 161. 
163. Scheme for payment of compensation in case of hit and run motor accidents. 
163A. Special provisions as to payment of compensation on structured formula basis. 
163B. Option to file claim in certain cases. 
164. Power of Central Government to make rules. 
 
CHAPTER XII 
CLAIMS TRIBUNALS 
165. Claims Tribunals. 
166. Application for compensation. 
167. Option regarding claims for compensation in certain cases. 
168. Award of the Claims Tribunal. 
169. Procedure and powers of Claims Tribunals. 
170. Impleading insurer in certain cases. 
171. Award of interest where any claim is allowed. 

6 
 
SECTIONS 
172. Award of compensatory costs in certain cases. 
173. Appeals. 
174. Recovery of money from insurer as arrear of land revenue. 
175. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts. 
176. Power of State Government to make rules. 
 
CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
177. General provision for punishment of offences. 
178. Penalty for travelling without pass or ticket and for dereliction of duty on the part of conductor 
and refusal to ply contract carriage, etc. 
179. Disobedience of orders, obstruction and refusal of information. 
180. Allowing unauthorised persons to drive vehicles. 
181. Driving vehicles in contravention of section 3 or section 4. 
182. Offences relating to licences. 
182A. Punishment for offences relating to construction and maintenance of vehicles. 
183. Driving at excessive speed, etc. 
184. Driving dangerously. 
185. Driving by a drunken person or by a person under the influence of drugs. 
186. Driving when mentally or phycically unfit to drive. 
187. Punishment for offences relating to accident. 
188. Punishment for abetment of certain offences. 
189. Racing and trails of speed. 
190. Using vehicle in unsafe condition. 
191. Sale of vehicle in or alteration of vehicle to condition contravening this Act. 
192. Using vehicle without registration. 
192A. Using vehicle without permit. 
193. Punishment of agents and canvassers without proper authority. 
194. Driving vehicle exceeding permissible weight. 
195. Imposition of minimum fine under certain circumstances. 
196. Driving uninsured vehicle. 
197. Taking vehicle without authority. 
198. Unauthorised interference with vehicle. 
199. Offences by companies. 
200. Composition of certain offences. 
201. Penalty for causing obstruction to free flow of traffic. 
202. Power to arrest without warrant. 
203. Breath tests. 
204. Laboratory test. 
205. Presumption of unfitness to drive. 
206. Power of police officer to impound document. 
207. Power to detain vehicles used without certificate of registration permit, etc. 
208. Summary disposal of cases. 
209. Restriction on conviction. 
210. Courts to send intimation about conviction. 

7 
 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
SECTIONS 
211. Power to levy fee. 
212. Publication, commencement and laying of rules and notifications. 
213. Appointment of motor vehicles officers. 
214. Effect of appeal and revision on orders passed by original authority. 
215. Road Safety Councils and Committees. 
216. Power to remove difficulties. 
217. Repeal and savings. 
217A. Renewal of permits, driving licences and registration granted under the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1939. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988 
ACT NO. 59 OF 1988 
[14th October, 1988.] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to motor vehicles. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different State and any reference in 
this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in relation to a State, be construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of this Act in that State. 
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(1) “area”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such area as the State Government may, 
having regard to the requirements of that provision, specify by notification in the Official Gazette; 
(2) “articulated vehicle” means a motor vehicle to which a semitrailer is attached; 
(3) “axle weight” means in relation to an axle of a vehicle the total weight transmitted by the 
several wheels attached to that axle to the surface on which the vehicle rests; 
(4) “certificate of registration” means the certificate issued by a competent authority to the effect 
that a motor vehicle has been duly registered in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV; 
(5) “conductor”, in relation to a stage carriage, means a person engaged in collecting fares from 
passengers, regulating their entrance into, or exit from, the stage carriage and performing such other 
functions as may be prescribed; 
(6) “conductor’s licence” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter III 
authorising the person specified therein to act as a conductor; 
(7) “contract carriage” means a motor vehicle which carries a passenger or passenger or 
passengers for hire or reward and is engaged under a contract, whether expressed or implied, for the 
use of such vehicle as a whole for the carriage of passengers mentioned therein and entered into by a 
person with a holder of a permit in relation to such vehicle or any person authorised by him in this 
behalf on a fixed or an agreed rate or sum— 
(a) on a time basis, whether or not with reference to any route or distance; or 
(b) from one point to another,  
and in either case, without stopping to pick up or set down passengers not included in the contract 
anywhere during the journey, and includes— 
(i) a maxicab; and 
(ii) a motor cab notwithstanding that separate fares are charged for its passengers; 
(8) “dealer” includes a person who is engaged— 
2*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(b) in building bodies for attachment to chassis; or 
                                                          
1.1st July, 1989, vide notification No. S.O. 368(E), dated 22nd May, 1989, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii). 
2.Sub-clause (a) omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

9 
 
(c) in the repair of motor vehicles; or 
(d) in the business of hypothecation, leasing or hire-purchase of motor vehicle; 
(9) “driver” includes, in relation to a motor vehicle which is drawn by another motor vehicle, the 
person who acts as a steersman of the drawn vehicle; 
(10) “driving licence” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter II authorising 
the person specified therein to drive, otherwise than as a learner, a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of 
any specified class or description; 
(11) “educational institution bus” means an omnibus, which is owned by a college, school or other 
educational institution and used solely for the purpose of transporting students or staff of the educational 
institution in connection with any of its activities; 
(12) “fares” includes sums payable for a season ticket or in respect of the hire of a contract carriage; 
(13) “goods” includes live-stock, and anything (other than equipment ordinarily used with the 
vehicle) carried by a vehicle except living persons, but does not include luggage or personal effects 
carried in a motor car or in a trailer attached to a motor car or the personal luggage of passengers 
travelling in the vehicle; 
(14) “goods carriage” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the carriage 
of goods, or any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted when used for the carriage of goods; 
(15) “gross vehicle weight” means in respect of any vehicle the total weight of the vehicle and load 
certified and registered by the registering authority as permissible for that vehicle; 
(16) “heavy goods vehicle” means any goods carriage the gross vehicle weight of which, or a tractor 
or a road-roller the unladen weight of either of which, exceeds 12,000 kilograms; 
(17) “heavy passenger motor vehicle” means any public service vehicle or private service vehicle or 
educational institution bus or omnibus the gross vehicle weight of any of which, or a motor car the 
unladen weight of which, exceeds 12,000 kilograms; 
(18) “invalid carriage” means a motor vehicle specially designed and constructed, and not merely, 
adapted, for the use of a person suffering from some physical defect or disability, and used solely by or 
for such a person; 
(19) “learner’s licence” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter II 
authorising the person specified therein to drive as a learner, a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of any 
specified class or description; 
(20) “licensing authority” means an authority empowered to issue licences under Chapter II or, as the 
case may be, Chapter III; 
(21) “light motor vehicle” means a transport vehicle or omnibus the gross vehicle weight of either of 
which or a motor car or tractor or road-roller the unladen weight of any of which, does not exceed 1[7500] 
kilograms; 
2[(21A) “manufacturer” means a person who is engaged in the manufacture of motor vehicles;] 
(22) “maxicab” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers, 
but not more than twelve passengers, excluding the driver, for hire or reward; 
(23) “medium goods vehicle” means any goods carriage other than a light motor vehicle or a heavy 
goods vehicle; 
(24) “medium passenger motor vehicle” means any public service vehicle or private service vehicle, 
or educational institution bus other than a motor cycle, invalid carriage, light motor vehicle or heavy 
passenger motor vehicle; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2, for “6000” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994).  

10 
 
(25) “motorcab” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry not more than six 
passengers excluding the driver for hire or reward; 
(26) “motor car” means any motor vehicle other than a transport vehicle, omnibus, road-roller, 
tractor, motor cycle or invalid carriage; 
(27) “motor cycle” means a two-wheeled motor vehicle, inclusive of any detachable side-car having 
an extra wheel, attached to the motor vehicle; 
(28) “motor vehicle” or “vehicle” means any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon 
roads whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or internal source and 
includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a trailer; but does not include a vehicle 
running upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any other 
enclosed premises or a vehicle having less than four wheels fitted with engine capacity of not 
exceeding1[twenty-five cubic centimetres]; 
(29) “omnibus” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six persons 
excluding the driver; 
(30) “owner” means a person in whose name a motor vehicle stands registered, and where such 
person is a minor, the guardian of such minor, and in relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of a 
hire-purchase, agreement, or an agreement of lease or an agreement of hypothecation, the person in 
possession of the vehicle under that agreement; 
(31) “permit” means a permit issued by a State or Regional Transport Authority or an authority 
prescribed in this behalf under this Act authorising the use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle; 
(32) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(33) “private service vehicle” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six 
persons excluding the driver and ordinarily used by or on behalf of the owner of such vehicle for the 
purpose of carrying persons for, or in connection with, his trade or business otherwise than for hire or 
reward but does not include a motor vehicle used for public purposes; 
(34) “public place” means a road, street, way or other place, whether a thoroughfare or not, to which 
the public have a right of access, and includes any place or stand at which passengers are picked up or set 
down by a stage carriage; 
(35) “public service vehicle” means any motor vehicle used or adapted to be used for the carriage of 
passengers for hire or reward, and includes a maxicab, a motorcab, contract carriage, and stage carriage; 
(36) “registered axle weight” means in respect of the axle of any vehicle, the axle weight certified and 
registered by the registering authority as permissible for that axle; 
(37) “registering authority” means an authority empowered to register motor vehicles under Chapter 
IV; 
(38) “route” means a line of travel which specifies the highway which may be traversed by a motor 
vehicle between one terminus and another; 
2[(39) “semi-trailer” means a vehicle not mechanically propelled (other than a trailer), which is 
intended to be connected to a motor vehicle and which is so constructed that a portion of it issuper-
imposed on, and a part of whose weight is borne by, thatmotor vehicle;] 
(40) “stage carriage” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers 
excluding the driver for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers, either for the 
whole journey or for stages of the journey; 
(41) “State Government” in relation to a Union territory means the Administrator thereof appointed 
under article 239 of the Constitution; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2, for “thirty-five cubic centimetres” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause (39) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

11 
 
(42) “State transport undertaking” means any undertaking providing road transport service, where 
such undertaking is carried on by,— 
(i) the Central Government or a State Government; 
(ii) any Road Transport Corporation established under section 3 of the Road Transport 
Corporations Act, 1950 (64 of 1950); 
(iii) any municipality or any corporation or company owned or controlled by the Central 
Government or one or more State Governments, or by the Central Government and one or more State 
Governments; 
1[(iv) Zilla Parishad or any other similar local authority.] 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “road transport service” means a service of motor 
vehicles carrying passengers or goods or both by road for hire or reward; 
(43) “tourist vehicle” means a contract carriage constructed or adapted and equipped and maintained 
in accordance with such specifications as may be prescribed in this behalf; 
(44) “tractor” means a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to carry any load (other than 
equipment used for the purpose of propulsion); but excludes a road-roller; 
(45) “traffic signs” includes all signals, warning sign posts, direction posts, markings on the road or 
other devices for the information, guidance or direction of drivers of motor vehicles; 
(46) “trailer” means any vehicle, other than a semi-trailer and a side-car, drawn or intended to be 
drawn by a motor vehicle; 
(47) “transport vehicle” means a public service vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational institution 
bus or a private service vehicle; 
(48) “unladen weight” means the weight of a vehicle or trailer including all equipment ordinarily used 
with the vehicle or trailer when working, but excluding the weight of a driver or attendant; and where 
alternative parts or bodies are used the unladen weight of the vehicle means the weight of the vehicle with 
the heaviest such alternative part or body; 
(49) “weight” means the total weight transmitted for the time being by the wheels of a vehicle to the 
surface on which the vehicle rests. 
2[2A. e-cart and e-rickshaw.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in the proviso to sub-section (1) of 
section 7 and sub-section (10) of section 9, the provisions of this Act shall apply to e-cart and e-rickshaw. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, “e-cart or e-rickshaw” means a special purpose battery powered 
vehicle of power not exceeding 4000 watts, having three wheels for carrying goods or passengers, as the 
case may be, for hire or reward, manufactured, constructed or adapted, equipped and maintained in 
accordance with such specifications, as may be prescribed in this behalf.] 
CHAPTER II 
LICENSING OF DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
3. Necessity for driving licence.—(1) No person shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place 
unless he holds an effective driving licence issued to him authorising him to drive the vehicle; and no 
person shall so drive a transport vehicle [other than 3[a motor cab or motor cycle] hired for his own use or 
rented under any scheme made under sub-section (2) of section 75] unless his driving licence specifically 
entitles him so to do. 
(2) The conditions subject to which sub-section (1) shall not apply to a person receiving instructions 
in driving a motor vehicle shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “a motor cab” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

12 
 
4. Age limit in connection with driving of motor vehicles.—(1) No person under the age of 
eighteen years shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place: 
Provided that 1[a motor cycle with engine capacity not exceeding 50cc] out gear may be driven in a 
public place by a person after attaining the age of sixteen years. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, no person under the age of twenty years shall drive a 
transport vehicle in any public place. 
(3) No learner’s licence or driving licence shall be issued to any person to drive a vehicle of the class 
to which he has made an application unless he is eligible to drive that class of vehicle under this section.  
5. Responsibility of owners of motor vehicles for contravention of sections 3 and 4.—No owner 
or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or permit any person who does not satisfy the 
provisions of section 3 or section 4 to drive the vehicle. 
6. Restrictions on the holding of driving licences.—(1) No person shall, while he holds any driving 
licence for the time being in force, hold any other driving licence except a learner’s licence or a driving 
licence issued in accordance with the provisions of section 18 or a document authorising, in accordance 
with the rules made under section 139, the person specified therein to drive a motor vehicle. 
(2) No holder of a driving licence or a learner’s licence shall permit it to be used by any other person. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent a licensing authority having the jurisdiction referred to in 
sub-section (1) of section 9 from adding to the classes of vehicles which the driving licence authorises the 
holder to drive. 
7. Restrictions on the granting of learner’s licences for certain vehicles.—2[(1) No person shall 
be granted a learner's licence to drive a transport vehicle unless he has held a driving licence to 
drive a light motor vehicle for at least one year:] 
3[Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to an e-cart or e-rickshaw.] 
(2) No person under the age of eighteen years shall be granted a learner’s licence to drive a motor 
cycle without gear except with the consent in writing of the person having the care of the person desiring 
the learner’s licence. 
8. Grant of learner’s licence.—(1) Any person who is not disqualified under section 4 for driving a 
motor vehicle and who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence 
may, subject to the provisions of section 7, apply to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the 
area— 
(i) in which he ordinarily resides or carries on business, or 
(ii) in which the school or establishment referred to in section 12 from where he intends to 
receive instruction in driving a motor vehicle is situate, 
for the issue to him of a learner’s licence. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such 
documents and with such fee as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by a medical certificate in such 
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government and signed by such registered medical practitioner, 
as the State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint for this purpose: 
4[Provided that no such medical certificate is required for licence to drive a vehicle other than a 
transport vehicle.] 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1988, s. 4, for “a motor cycle without gear” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
4. Ins. by Act 54 of 1988, s. 6 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

13 
 
(4) If, from the application or from the medical certificate referred to in sub-section (3), it appears that 
the applicant is suffering from any disease or disability which is likely to cause the driving by him of a 
motor vehicle of the class which he would be authorised by the learner’s licence applied for to drive to be 
a source of danger to the public or to the passengers, the licensing authority shall refuse to issue the 
learner’s licence: 
Provided that a learner’s licence limited to driving an invalid carriage may be issued to the applicant, 
if the licensing authority is satisfied that he is fit to drive such a carriage. 
(5) No learner’s licence shall be issued to any applicant unless he passes to the satisfaction of the 
licensing authority such test as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(6) When an application has been duly made to the appropriate licensing authority and the applicant 
has satisfied such authority of his physical fitness under sub-section (3) and has passed to the satisfaction 
of the licensing authority the test referred to in sub-section (5), the licensing authority shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 7, issue the applicant a learner’s licence unless the applicant is disqualified under 
section 4 for driving a motor vehicle or is for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a 
licence to drive a motor vehicle: 
Provided that a licensing authority may issue a learner’s licence to drive a motor cycle or a light 
motor vehicle notwithstanding that it is not the appropriate licensing authority, if such authority is 
satisfied that there is good reason for the applicant’s inability to apply to the appropriate licensing 
authority. 
(7) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
rules made in this behalf, exempt generally, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the rules, any class of persons from the provisions of sub-section (3), or sub-section (5), or 
both. 
(8) Any learner’s licence for driving a motor cycle in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall, after such commencement, be deemed to be effective for driving a motor cycle with or 
without gear. 
9. Grant of driving licence—(1) Any person who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or 
obtaining a driving licence may apply to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area— 
(i) in which he ordinarily resides or carries on business, or 
(ii) in which the school or establishment referred to in section 12 from where he is receiving or 
has received instruction in driving a motor vehicle is situated,  
for the issue to him of a driving licence. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such 
fee and such documents as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
1[(3) If the applicant passes such test as may be prescribed by the Central Government, he shall be 
issued the driving licence: 
Provided that no such test shall be necessary where the applicant produces proof to show that— 
(a) (i) the applicant has previously held a driving licenceto drive such class of vehicle and that the 
period between thedata of expiry of that licence and the date of the applicationdoes not exceed five 
years, or 
(ii) the applicant holds or has previously held a driving licence to drive such class of vehicle 
issued under section 18, or 
(iii) the applicant holds a driving licence to   drive such class of vehicle issued by a competent 
authority of any country outside India, subject to the condition that the applicant complies with the 
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 8, 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 7, for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

14 
 
(b)the applicant is not suffering from any disabilitywhich is likely to cause the driving by him to 
be a source ofdanger to the public; and the licensing authority may, for that purpose, require the 
applicant to produce a medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 8: 
Provided further that where the application is for a driving licence to drive a motor vehicle 
(not being a transportvehicle), the licensing authority may exempt the applicant from the test of 
competence to drive a vehicle prescribed under this sub-section, if the applicant possesses a driving 
certificate issued by any institution recognised in this behalf bythe State Government.] 
(4) Where the application is for a licence to drive a transport vehicle, no such authorisation shall be 
granted to any applicant unless he possesses such minimum educational qualification as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government and a driving certificate issued by a school or establishment 
referred to in section 12. 
1[(5) Where the applicant does not   pass the test; he may be permitted to re-appear for the test 
after a period of seven days: 
Provided that where the applicant does not pass the test even after three appearances, he shall 
not be qualified to re-appear for such test before the expiry of a period of sixty days from the date 
of last such test.] 
(6) The test of competence to drive shall be carried out in a vehicle of the type to which the 
application refers: 
Provided that a person who passed a test in driving a motor cycle with gear shall be deemed also to 
have passed a test in driving a motor cycle without gear. 
(7) When any application has been duly made to the appropriate licensing authority and the applicant 
has satisfied such authority of his competence to drive, the licensing authority shall issue the applicant a 
driving licence unless the applicant is for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving 
licence: 
Provided that a licensing authority may issue a driving licence to drive a motor cycle or a light motor 
vehicle notwithstanding that it is not the appropriate licensing authority, if the licensing authority is 
satisfied that there is good and sufficient reason for the applicant’s inability to apply to the appropriate 
licensing authority: 
Provided further that the licensing authority shall not issue a new driving licence to the applicant, if 
he had previously held a driving licence, unless it is satisfied that there is good and sufficient reason for 
his inability to obtain a duplicate copy of his former licence. 
(8) If the licensing authority is satisfied, after giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard, that 
he— 
(a) is a habitual criminal or a habitual drunkard; or 
(b) is a habitual addict to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance within the meaning of the 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985); or 
(c) is a person whose licence to drive any motor vehicle has, at any time earlier, been revoked, 
it may, for reasons to be recorded tin writing, make an order refusing to issue a driving licence to such 
person and any person aggrieved by 586 an order made by a licensing authority under this sub-section 
may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority. 
(9) Any driving licence for driving a motor cycle in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall, after such commencement, be deemed to be effective for driving a motor cycle with or 
without gear. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 7, for sub-section (5) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

15 
 
1[(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the driving licence to drive e-cart or  
e-rickshaw shall be issued in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.] 
10. Form and contents of licences to drive.—(1) Every learner’s licence and driving licence, except 
a driving licence issued under section 18, shall be in such form and shall contain such information as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) A learner’s licence or, as the case may be, driving licence shall also be expressed as entitling the 
holder to drive a motor vehicle of one or more of the following classes, namely:— 
(a) motor cycle without gear; 
(b) motor cycle with gear; 
(c) invalid carriage; 
(d) light motor vehicle; 
2[(e) transport vehicle;] 
(i) road-roller; 
(j) motor vehicle of a specified description. 
11. Additions to driving licence.—(1) Any person holding a driving licence to drive any class or 
description of motor vehicles, who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving 
licence to drive any other class or description of motor vehicles, may apply to the licensing authority 
having jurisdiction in the area in which he resides or carries on his business in such form and 
accompanied by such documents and with such fees as may be prescribed by the Central Government for 
the addition of such other class or description of motor vehicles to the licence. 
(2) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the Central Government, the provisions of section 9 
shall apply to an application under this section as if the said application were for the grant of a licence 
under that section to drive the class or description of motor vehicles which the applicant desires to be 
added to his licence. 
12. Licensing and regulation of schools or establishments for imparting instruction in driving of 
motor vehicles.—(1) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of licensing and 
regulating, by the State Governments, schools or establishments (by whatever name called) for imparting 
instruction in driving of motor vehicles and matters connected therewith. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) licensing of such schools or establishments including grant, renewal and revocation of such 
licences; 
(b) supervision of such schools or establishments; 
(c) the form of application and the form of licence and the particulars to be contained therein; 
(d) fee to be paid with the application for such licences; 
(e) conditions subject to which such licences may be granted; 
(f) appeals against the orders of refusal to grant or renew such licences and appeals against the 
orders revoking such licences; 
(g) conditions subject to which a person may establish and maintain any such school or 
establishment for imparting instruction in driving of motor vehicles; 
(h) nature, syllabus and duration of course or courses for efficient instruction in driving any motor 
vehicle; 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 4 (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
2. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 8, for clauses (e) to (h) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994).  

16 
 
(i) apparatus and equipments (including motor vehicles fitted with dual control) required for the 
purpose of imparting such instruction; 
(j) suitability of the premises at which such schools or establishments may be established or 
maintained and facilities to be provided therein; 
(k) qualifications, both educational and professional (including experience), which a person 
imparting instruction in driving a motor vehicle shall possess; 
(l) inspection of such schools and establishments (including the services rendered by them and the 
apparatus, equipments and motor vehicles maintained by them for imparting such instruction); 
(m) maintenance of records by such schools or establishments; 
(n) financial stability of such schools or establishments; 
(o) the driving certificates, if any, to be issued by such schools or establishments and the form in 
which such driving certificates shall be issued and the requirements to be complied with for the 
purposes of issuing such certificates; 
(p) such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 
(3) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
rules made in this behalf, exempt generally, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the rules, any class of schools or establishments imparting instruction in driving of motor 
vehicles or matters connected therewith from the provisions of this section. 
(4) A school or establishment imparting instruction in driving of motor vehicles or matters connected 
therewith immediately before the commencement of this Act whether under a licence or not, may 
continue to impart such instruction without a licence issued under this Act for a period of one month from 
such commencement, and if it has made an application for such licence under this Act within the said 
period of one month and such application is in the prescribed form, contains the prescribed particulars and 
is accompanied by the prescribed fee, till the disposal of such application by the licensing authority. 
13. Extent of effectiveness of licences, to drive motor vehicles.—A learner’s licence or a driving 
licence issued under this Act shall be effective throughout India. 
14. Currency of licences to drive motor vehicles.—(1) A learner’s licence issued under this Act 
shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be effective for a period of six months from the date of 
issue of the licence. 
(2) A driving licence issued or renewed under this Act shall,— 
(a) in the case of a licence to drive a transport vehicle, be effective for a period of three years: 
1*** 
2[Provided that in the case of licence to drive a transport vehicle carrying goods of dangerous 
or  hazardous nature be effective for a period of one year and renewal thereof shall be subject to the 
condition that   the driver   undergoes     one   day   refresher course of the prescribed syllabus; 
and;] 
(b) in the case of any other licence,— 
(i) if the person obtaining the licence, either originally or on renewal thereof, has not attained 
the age of 3[fifty years] on the date of issue or, as the case may be, renewal thereof,— 
(A) be effective for a period of twenty years from the date of such issue or renewal;or 
(B) until the date on which such person attains the age of 3[fifty years], 
whichever is earlier; 
                                                          
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 9 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “forty years” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

17 
 
1[(ii) if the person referred to in sub-clause (i), has attained the age of fifty years on the 
date of issue or as the case may be. renewal thereof, be effective, on payment of such fee as 
may be prescribed, for a period of five years from the date of such issue or renewal:] 
Provided that every driving licence shall, notwithstanding its expiry under this sub-section, continue 
to be effective for a period of thirty days from such expiry. 
15. Renewal of driving licences.—(1) Any licensing authority may, on application made to it, renew 
a driving licence issued under the provisions of this Act with effect from the date of its expiry: 
Provided that in any case where the application for the renewal of a licence is made more than thirty 
days after the date of its expiry, the driving licence shall be renewed with effect from the date of its 
renewal: 
Provided further that where the application is for the renewal of a licence to drive a transport vehicle 
or where in any other case the applicant has attained the age of forty years, the same shall be accompanied 
by a medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 8, and the provisions of sub-section (4) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to 
every such case as they apply in relation to a learner’s licence. 
(2) An application for the renewal of a driving licence shall be made in such form and accompanied 
by such documents as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) Where an application for the renewal of a driving licence is made previous to, or not more than 
thirty days after the date of its expiry, the fee payable for such renewal shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government in this behalf. 
(4) Where an application for the renewal of a driving licence is made more than thirty days after the 
date of its expiry, the fee payable for such renewal shall be such amount as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government: 
Provided that the fee referred to in sub-section (3) may be accepted by the licensing authority in 
respect of an application for the renewal of a driving licence made under this sub-section if it is satisfied 
that the applicant was prevented by good and sufficient cause from applying within the time specified in 
sub-section (3): 
Provided further that if the application is made more than five years after the driving licence has 
ceased to be effective, the licensing authority may refuse to renew the driving licence, unless the applicant 
undergoes and passes to its satisfaction the test of competence to drive referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 9. 
(5) Where the application for renewal has been rejected, the fee paid shall be refunded to such extent 
and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(6) Where the authority renewing the driving licence is not the authority which issued the driving 
licence it shall intimate the fact of renewal to the authority which issued the driving licence. 
16. Revocation of driving licence on grounds of disease or disability.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the foregoing sections, any licensing authority may at any time revoke a driving licence or 
may require, as a condition of continuing to hold such driving licence, the holder thereof to produce a 
medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in sub-section (3) of  
section 8, if the licensing authority has reasonable grounds to belive that the holder of the driving licence 
is, by virtue of any disease or disability, unfit to drive a motor vehicle and where the authority revoking a 
driving licence is not the authority which issued the same, it shall intimate the fact of revocation to the 
authority which issued that licence. 
17. Orders refusing or revoking driving licences and appeals therefrom—(1) Where a licensing 
authority refuses to issue any learner’s licence or to issue or renew, or revokes, any driving licence, or 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 9, for sub-clause (ii) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

18 
 
refuses to add a class or description of motor vehicle to any driving licence, it shall do so by an order 
communicated to the applicant or the holder, as the case may be, giving the reasons in writing for such 
refusal or revocation. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate authority shall be binding on the authority which made the order. 
18. Driving licences to drive motor vehicles, belonging to the Central Government.—(1) Such 
authority as may be prescribed by the Central Government may issue driving licence valid throughout 
India to persons who have completed their eighteenth year to drive motor vehicles which are the property 
or for the time being under the exclusive control of the Central Government and are used for Government 
purposes relating to the defence of the country and unconnected with any commercial enterprise. 
(2) A driving licence issued under this section shall specify the class or description of vehicle which 
the holder is entitled to drive and the period for which he is so entitled. 
(3) A driving licence issued under this section shall not entitle the holder to drive any motor vehicle 
except a motor vehicle referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4) The authority issuing any driving licence under this section shall, at the request of any State 
Government, furnish such information respecting any person to whom a driving licence is issued as that 
Government may at any time require. 
19. Power of licensing authority to disqualify from holding a driving licence or revoke such 
licence.—(1) If a licensing authority is satisfied, after giving the holder of a driving licence an 
opportunity of being heard, that he— 
(a) is a habitual criminal or a habitual drunkard; or 
(b) is a habitual addict to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance within the meaning of the 
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985); or 
(c) is using or has used a motor vehicle in the commission of a cognizable offence; or 
(d) has by his previous conduct as driver of a motor vehicle shown that his driving is likely to be 
attended with danger to the public; or 
(e) has obtained any driving licence or a licence to drive a particular class or description of motor 
vehicle by fraud or misrepresentation; or 
(f) has committed any such act which is likely to cause nuisance or danger to the public, as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government, having regard to the objects of this Act; or 
(g) has failed to submit to, or has not passed, the tests referred to in the proviso to sub-section (3) 
of section 22; or 
(h) being a person under the age of eighteen years who has been granted a learner’s licence or a 
driving licence with the consent in writing of the person having the care of the holder of the licence 
and has ceased to be in such care, 
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, make an order— 
(i) disqualifying that person for a specified period for holding or obtaining any driving licence to 
drive all or any classes or descriptions of vehicles specified in the licence; or 
(ii) revoke any such licence. 
(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made, the holder of a driving licence shall forthwith 
surrender his driving licence to the licensing authority making the order, if the driving licence has not 
already been surrendered, and the licensing authority shall,— 
(a) if the driving licence is a driving licence issued under this Act, keep it until the 
disqualification has expired or has been removed; or 

19 
 
(b) if it is not a driving licence issued under this Act, endorse the disqualification upon it and send 
it to the licensing authority by which it was issued; or 
(c) in the case of revocation of any licence, endorse the revocation upon it and if it is not the 
authority which issued the same, intimate the fact of revocation to the authority which issued that 
licence: 
Provided that where the driving licence of a person authorises him to drive more than one class or 
description of motor vehicles and the order, made under sub-section (1), disqualifies him from driving 
any specified class or description of motor vehicles, the licensing authority shall endorse the 
disqualification upon the driving licence and return the same to the holder. 
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a licensing authority under sub-section (1) may, within 
thirty days of the receipt of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority, and such appellate authority shall 
give notice to the licensing authority and hear either party if so required by that party and may pass such 
order as it thinks fit and an order passed by any such appellate authority shall be final. 
20. Power of Court to disqualify.—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act or 
of an offence in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used, the Court by which such person is 
convicted may, subject to the provisions of this Act, in addition to imposing any other punishment 
authorised by law, declare the persons so convicted to be disqualified, for such period as the Court may 
specify, from holding any driving licence to drive all classes or description of vehicles, or any particular 
class or description of such vehicles, as are specified in such licence: 
Provided that in respect of an offence punishable under section 183 no such order shall be made for 
the first or second offence. 
(2) Where a person is convicted of an offence under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 132, 
section 134 or section 185, the Court convicting any person of any such offence shall order the 
disqualification under sub-section (1), and if the offence is relatable to clause (c) of sub-section(1) of 
section 132 or section 134, such disqualification shall be for a period of not less than one month, and if 
the offence is relatable to section 185, such disqualification shall be for a period of not less than six 
months. 
(3) A Court shall, unless for special reasons to be recorded in writing it thinks fit to order otherwise, 
order the disqualification of a person— 
(a) who having been convicted of an offence punishable under section 184 is again convicted of 
an offence punishable under that section, 
(b) who is convicted of an offence punishable under section 189, or 
(c) who is convicted of an offence punishable under section 192: 
Provided that the period of disqualification shall not exceed, in the case referred to in clause (a), five 
years, or, in the case referred to in clause (b), two years or, in the case referred to in clause (c), one year. 
(4) A Court ordering the disqualification of a person convicted of an offence punishable under section 
184 may direct that such person shall, whether he has previously passed the test of competence to drive as 
referred to in sub-section (3) of section 9 or not, remain disqualified until he has subsequent to the making 
of the order of disqualification passed that test to the satisfaction of the licensing authority. 
(5) The Court to which an appeal would ordinarily lie from any conviction of an offence of the nature 
specified in sub-section (1) may set aside or vary any order of disqualification made under that  
sub-section notwithstanding that no appeal would lie against the conviction as a result of which such 
order of disqualification was made. 
21. Suspension of driving licence in certain cases.—(1) Where, in relation to a person who had 
been previously convicted of an offence punishable under section 184, a case is registered by a police 
officer on the allegation that such person has, by such dangerous driving as is referred to in the said 
section 184, of any class or description of motor vehicle caused the death of, or grievous hurt to, one or 

20 
 
more persons, the driving licence held by such person shall in relation to such class or description of 
motor vehicle become suspended— 
(a) for a period of six months from the date on which the case is registered, or 
(b) if such person is discharged or acquitted before the expiry of the period aforesaid, until such 
discharge or acquittal, as the case may be. 
(2) Where by virtue of the provisions of sub-section (1), the driving licence held by a person becomes 
suspended, the police officer, by whom the case referred to in sub-section (1) is registered, shall bring 
such suspension to the notice of the Court competent to take cognizance of such offence, and thereupon, 
such Court shall take possession of the driving licence, endorse the suspension thereon and intimate the 
fact of such endorsement to the licensing authority by which the licence was granted or last renewed. 
(3) Where the person referred to in sub-section (1) is acquitted or discharged, the Court shall cancel 
the endorsement on such driving licence with regard to the suspension thereof. 
(4) If a driving licence in relation to a particular class or description of motor vehicles is suspended 
under sub-section (1), the person holding such licence shall be debarred from holding or obtaining any 
licence to drive such particular class or description of motor vehicles so long as the suspension of the 
driving licence remains in force. 
22. Suspension or cancellation of driving licence on conviction.—(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of sub-section (3) of section 20 where a person, referred to in sub-section (1) of section 21 is 
convicted of an offence of causing, by such dangerous driving as is referred to in section 184 of any class 
or description of motor vehicle the death of, or grievous hurt to, one or more persons, the Court by which 
such person is convicted may cancel, or suspend for such period as it may think fit, the driving licence 
held by such person in so far as it relates to that class or description of motor vehicle. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 20, if a person, having been 
previously convicted of an offence punishable under section 185 is again convicted of an offence 
punishable under that section, the Court, making such subsequent conviction, shall, by order, cancel the 
driving licence held by such person. 
(3) If a driving licence is cancelled or suspended under this section, the Court shall take the driving 
licence in its custody, endorse the cancellation or, as the case may be, suspension, thereon and send the 
driving licence so endorsed to the authority by which the licence was issued or last renewed and such 
authority shall, on receipt of the licence, keep the licence in its safe custody, and in the case of a 
suspended licence, return the licence to the holder thereof after the expiry of the period of suspension on 
an application made by him for such return: 
Provided that no such licence shall be returned unless the holder thereof has, after the expiry of the 
period of suspension, undergone and passed, to the satisfaction of the licensing authority by which the 
licence was issued or last renewed, a fresh test of competence to drive referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 9 and produced a medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 8. 
(4) If a licence to drive a particular class or description of motor vehicles is cancelled or suspended 
under this section, the person holding such a licence shall be debarred from holding, or obtaining, any 
licence to drive such particular class or description of motor vehicles so long as the cancellation or 
suspension of the driving licence remains in force. 
23. Effect of disqualification order.—(1) A person in respect of whom any disqualification order is 
made under section 19 or section 20 shall be debarred to the extent and for the period specified in such 
order from holding or obtaining a driving licence and the driving licence, if any, held by such person at 
the date of the order shall cease to be effective to such extent and during such period. 
(2) The operation of a disqualification order made under section 20 shall not be suspended or 
postponed while an appeal is pending against such order or against the conviction as a result of which 
such order is made, unless the appellate court so directs. 

21 
 
(3) Any person in respect of whom any disqualification order has been made may at any time after the 
expiry of six months from the date of the order apply to the Court or other authority by which the order 
was made, to remove the disqualification; and the Court or authority, as the case may be, may, having 
regard to all the circumstances, either cancel or vary the disqualification order: 
Provided that where the Court or other authority refuses to cancel or vary any disqualification order 
under this section, a second application thereunder shall not be entertained before the expiry of a period of 
three months from the date of such refusal. 
24. Endorsement.—(1) The Court or authority making an order of disqualification shall endorse or 
cause to be endorsed upon the driving licence if any, held by the person disqualified, particulars of the 
order of disqualification and of any conviction of an offence in respect of which an order of 
disqualification is made; and particulars of any cancellation or variation of an order of disqualification 
made under sub-section (3) of section 23 shall be similarly so endorsed. 
(2) A Court by which any person is convicted of an offence under this Act as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government, having regard to the objects of this Act, shall, whether or not a disqualification 
order is made in respect of such conviction, endorse or cause to be endorsed particulars of such conviction 
on any driving licence held by the person convicted. 
(3) Any person accused of an offence prescribed under sub-section (2) shall when attending the Court 
bring with him his driving licence if it is in his possession. 
(4) Where any person is convicted of any offence under this Act and sentenced to imprisonment for a 
period exceeding three months the Court awarding the sentence shall endorse the fact of such sentence 
upon the driving licence of the person concerned and the prosecuting authority shall intimate the fact of 
such endorsement to the authority by which the driving licence was granted or last renewed. 
(5) When the driving licence is endorsed or caused to be endorsed by any Court, such Court shall 
send the particulars of the endorsement to the licensing authority by which the driving licence was 
granted or last renewed. 
(6) Where on an appeal against any conviction or order of a Court, which has been endorsed on a 
driving licence, the appellate court varies or sets aside the conviction or order, the appellate court shall 
inform the licensing authority by which the driving licence was granted or last renewed and such 
authority shall amend or cause to be amended the endorsement. 
25. Transfer of endorsement and issue of driving licence free from endorsement.—(1) An 
endorsement on any driving licence shall be transferred to any new or duplicate driving licence obtained 
by the holder thereof until the holder becomes entitled under the provisions of this section to have a 
driving licence issued to him free from endorsement. 
(2) Where a driving licence is required to be endorsed and the driving licence is not in the possession 
of the Court or authority by which the endorsement is to be made, then— 
(a) if the person in respect of whom the endorsement is to be made is at the time the holder of a 
driving licence, he shall produce the driving licence to the Court or authority within five days, or such 
longer time as the Court or authority may fix; or 
(b) if, not being then the holder of a driving licence, he subsequently obtains a driving licence, he 
shall within five days after obtaining the driving licence produce it to the Court or authority, 
and if the driving licence is not produced within the time specified, it shall, on the expiration of such time, 
be of no effect until it is produced for the purpose of endorsement. 
(3) A person whose driving licence has been endorsed shall, if during a continuous period of three 
years after such endorsement no further endorsement has been made against him, be entitled on 
surrendering his driving licence and on payment of a fee of five rupees, to receive a new driving licence 
free from all endorsements: 
Provided that if the endorsement is only in respect of an offence contravening the speed limits 
referred to in section 112, such person shall be entitled to receive a new driving licence free from such 
endorsements on the expiration of one year of the date of the endorsement: 

22 
 
Provided further that in reckoning the said period of three years and one year, respectively, any period 
during which the said person was disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence shall be excluded. 
26. Maintenance of State Registers of Driving Licences.—(1) Each State Government shall 
maintain, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government, a register to be known as the 
State Register of Driving Licences, in respect of driving licences issued and renewed by the licensing 
authorities of the State Government, containing the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) names and addresses of holders of driving licences; 
(b) licence numbers; 
(c) dates of issue or renewal of licences; 
(d) dates of expiry of licences; 
(e) classes and types of vehicles authorised to be driven; and 
(f) such other particulars as the Central Government may prescribe. 
(2) Each State Government shall supply to the Central Government a 1[printed copy or copy in such 
other form as the Central Government may require] of the State Register of Driving Licences and shall 
inform the Central Government without delay of all additions to and other amendments in such register 
made from time to time. 
(3) The State Register of Driving Licences shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the State Government. 
27. Power of Central Government to make rules.—The Central Government may make rules— 
2[(a) specifications relating to e-cart and e-rickshaw under sub-section (2) of section 2A;] 
3[(aa)] regarding conditions referred to in sub-section (2) of section 3; 
(b) providing for the form in which the application for learner’s licence may be made, the 
information it shall contain and the documents to be submitted with the application referred to in  
sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(c) providing for the form of medical certificate referred to in sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(d) providing for the particulars for the test referred to in sub-section (5) of section 8; 
(e) providing for the form in which the application for driving licence may be made, the 
information it shall contain and the documents to be submitted with the application referred to in  
sub-section (2) of section 9; 
(f) providing for the particulars regarding test of competence to drive, referred to in sub-section 
(3) of section 9; 
2[(ff) the manner and the conditions subject to which the driving licence may be issued under  
sub-section (10) of section 9;] 
(g) specifying the minimum educational qualifications of persons to whom licences to drive 
transport vehicles may be issued under this Act and the time within which such qualifications are to 
be acquired by such persons; 
(h) providing for the form and contents of the licences referred to in sub-section (1) of section 10; 
(i) providing for the form and contents of the application referred to in sub-section (1) of  
section 11 and documents to be submitted with the application and the fee to be charged; 
(j) providing for the conditions subject to which section 9 shall apply to an application made 
under section 11; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 10, for “printed copy” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 
3. Clause (a) renumbered as clause (aa) thereof by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-1-2015). 

23 
 
(k) providing for the form and contents of the application referred to in sub-section (1) of section 
15 and the documents to accompany such application under sub-section (2) of section 15; 
(l) providing for the authority to grant licences under sub-section (1) of section 18; 
(m) specifying the fees payable under sub-section (2) of section 8, sub-section (2) of section 9 and 
sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 15 for the grant of learner’s licences, and for the grant and renewal 
of driving licences and licences for the purpose of regulating the schools or establishment for 
imparting instructions in driving motor vehicles; 
(n) specifying the acts for the purposes of clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 19; 
(o) specifying the offences under this Act for the purposes of sub-section (2) of section 24; 
(p) to provide for all or any of the matters referred to in sub-section (1) of section 26; 
(q) any other matter which is, or has to be, prescribed by the Central Government. 
28. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters specified in  
section 27. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of licensing authorities and other 
prescribed authorities; 
(b) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees: 
Provided that no fee so fixed shall exceed twenty-five rupees; 
(c) the issue of duplicate licences to replace licences lost, destroyed or mutilated, the replacement 
of photographs which have become obsolete and the fees to be charged therefor; 
(d) the badges and uniform to be worn by drivers of transport vehicles and the fees to be paid in 
respect of badges; 
(e) the fee payable for the issue of a medical certificate under sub-section (3) of section 8; 
(f) the exemption of prescribed persons, or prescribed classes of persons, from payment of all or 
any portion of the fees payable under this Chapter; 
(g) the communication of particulars of licences granted by one licensing authority to other 
licensing authorities; 
(h) the duties, functions and conduct of such persons to whom licences to drive transport vehicles 
are issued; 
(i) the exemption of drivers of road-rollers from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter or of 
the rules made thereunder; 
(j) the manner in which the State Register of Driving Licences shall be maintained under section 
26; 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
CHAPTER III 
LICENSING OF CONDUCTORS OF STAGE CARRIAGES 
29. Necessity for conductor’s licence.—(1) No person shall act as a conductor of a stage carriage 
unless he holds an effective conductor’s licence issued to him authorising him to act as such conductor; 
and no person shall employ or permit any person who is not so licensed to act as a conductor of a stage 
carriage. 

24 
 
(2) A State Government may prescribe the conditions subject to which sub-section (1) shall not apply 
to a driver of a stage carriage performing the functions of a conductor or to a person employed to act as a 
conductor for a period not exceeding one month. 
30. Grant of conductor’s licence.—(1) Any person who possesses such minimum educational 
qualification as may be prescribed by the State Government and is not disqualified under sub-section (1) 
of section 31 and who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a conductor’s licence 
may apply to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area in which he ordinarily resides or 
carries on business for the issue to him of a conductor’s licence. 
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and shall contain such information 
as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every application for a conductor’s licence shall be accompanied by a medical certificate in such 
form as may be prescribed, signed by a registered medical practitioner and shall also be accompanied by 
two clear copies of a recent photograph of the applicant. 
(4) A conductor’s licence issued under this Chapter shall be in such form and contain such particulars 
as may be prescribed and shall be effective throughout the State in which it is issued. 
(5) The fee for a conductor’s licence and for each renewal thereof shall be one-half of that for a 
driving licence. 
31. Disqualifications for the grant of conductor’s licence.—(1) No person under the age of 
eighteen years shall hold, or be granted, a conductor’s licence. 
(2) The licensing authority may refuse to issue a conductor’s licence— 
(a) if the applicant does not possess the minimum educational qualification; 
(b) if the medical certificate produced by the applicant discloses that he is physically unfit to act 
as a conductor; and 
(c) if any previous conductor’s licence held by the applicant was revoked. 
32. Revocation of a conductor’s licence on grounds of disease or disability.—A conductor’s 
licence may at any time be revoked by any licensing authority if that authority has reasonable grounds to 
believe that the holder of the licence is suffering from any disease or disability which is likely to render 
him permanently unfit to hold such a licence and where the authority revoking a conductor’s licence is 
not the authority which issued the same, it shall intimate the fact of such revocation to the authority which 
issued that licence: 
Provided that before revoking any licence, the licensing authority shall give the person holding such 
licence a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
33. Orders refusing, etc., conductor’s licences and appeals therefrom.—(1) Where a licensing 
authority refuses to issue or renew, or revokes any conductor’s licence, it shall do so by an order 
communicated to the applicant or the holder, as the case may be, giving the reasons in writing for such 
refusal or revocation. 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate authority shall be binding on the authority which made the order. 
34. Power of licensing authority to disqualify.—(1) If any licensing authority is of opinion that it is 
necessary to disqualify the holder of a conductor’s licence for holding or obtaining such a licence on 
account of his previous conduct as a conductor, it may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order 
disqualifying that person for a specified period, not exceeding one year, for holding or obtaining a 
conductor’s licence: 
Provided that before disqualifying the holder of a licence, the licensing authority shall give the person 
holding such licence a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 

25 
 
(2) Upon the issue of any such order, the holder of the conductor’s licence shall forthwith surrender 
the licence to the authority making the order, if the licence has not already been surrendered, and the 
authority shall keep the licence until the disqualification has expired or has been removed. 
(3) Where the authority disqualifying the holder of a conductor’s licence under this section is not the 
authority which issued the licence, it shall intimate the fact of such disqualification to the authority which 
issued the same. 
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate authority shall be binding on the authority which made the order. 
35. Power of Court to disqualify.—(1) Where any person holding a conductor’s licence is convicted 
of an offence under this Act, the Court by which such person is convicted may, in addition to imposing 
any other punishment authorised by law, declare the person so convicted to be disqualified for such 
period as the Court may specify for holding a conductor’s licence. 
(2) The Court to which an appeal lies from any conviction of an offence under this Act may set aside 
or vary any order of disqualification made by the Court below, and the Court to which appeals ordinarily 
lie from such Court, may set aside or vary any order of disqualification made by that Court, 
notwithstanding that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such order was made. 
36. Certain provisions of Chapter II to apply to conductor’s licence.—The provisions of  
sub-section (2) of section 6, sections 14, 15 and 23, sub-section (1) of section 24 and section 25 shall, so 
far as may be, apply in relation to a conductor’s licence, as they apply in relation to a driving licence. 
37. Savings.—If any licence to act as a conductor of a stage carriage (by whatever name called) has 
been issued in any State and is effective immediately before the commencement of this Act, it shall 
continue to be effective, notwithstanding such commencement, for the period for which it would have 
been effective, if this Act had not been passed, and every such licence shall be deemed to be a licence 
issued under this Chapter as if this Chapter had been in force on the date on which that licence was 
granted. 
38. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of licensing authorities and other 
prescribed authorities under this Chapter; 
(b) the conditions subject to which drivers of stage carriages performing the functions of a 
conductor and persons temporarily employed to act as conductors may be exempted from the 
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 29; 
(c) the minimum educational qualifications of conductors; their duties and functions and the 
conduct of persons to whom conductor’s licences are issued; 
(d) the form of application for conductor’s licences or for renewal of such licences and the 
particulars it may contain; 
(e) the form in which conductor’s licences may be issued or renewed and the particulars it may 
contain; 
(f) the issue of duplicate licences to replace licences lost, destroyed or mutilated, the replacement 
of photographs which have become obsolete and the fees to be charged therefor; 
(g) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees: 
Provided that no fee so fixed shall exceed twenty-five rupees; 

26 
 
(h) the badges and uniform to be worn by conductors of stage carriages and the fees to be paid in 
respect of such badges; 
(i) the grant of the certificates referred to in sub-section (3) of section 30 by registered medical 
practitioners and the form of such certificates; 
(j) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a conductor’s licence issued in 
another State shall be effective in the State; 
(k) the communication of particulars of conductor’s licences from one authority to other 
authorities; and 
(l) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
CHAPTER IV 
REGISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
39. Necessity for registration.—No person shall drive any motor vehicle and no owner of a motor 
vehicle shall cause or permit the vehicle to be driven in any public place or in any other place unless the 
vehicle is registered in accordance with this Chapter and the certificate of registration of the vehicle has 
not been suspended or cancelled and the vehicle carries a registration mark displayed in the prescribed 
manner: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a motor vehicle in possession of a dealer subject to 
such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
40. Registration, where to be made.—Subject to the provisions of section 42, section 43 and section 
60, every owner of a motor vehicle shall cause the vehicle to be registered by a registering authority in 
whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the vehicle is normally kept. 
41. Registration, how to be made.—(1) An application by or on behalf of the owner of a motor 
vehicle for registration shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such documents, particulars 
and information and shall be made within such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that where a motor vehicle is jointly owned by more persons than one, the application shall 
be made by one of them on behalf of all the owners and such applicant shall be deemed to be the owner of 
the motor vehicle for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) An application referred to in sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) The registering authority shall issue to the owner of a motor vehicle registered by it a certificate of 
registration in such form and containing such particulars and information and in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(4) In addition to the other particulars required to be included in the certificate of registration, it shall 
also specify the type of the motor vehicle, being a type as the Central Government may, having regard to 
the design, construction and use of the motor vehicle, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify. 
(5) The registering authority shall enter the particulars of the certificate referred to in sub-section (3) 
in a register to be maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(6) The registering authority shall assign to the vehicle, for display thereon, a distinguishing mark (in 
this Act referred to as the registration mark) consisting of one of the groups of such of those letters and 
followed by such letters and figures as are allotted to the State by the Central Government from time to 
time by notification in the Official Gazette, and displayed and shown on the motor vehicle in such form 
and in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(7) A certificate of registration issued under sub-section (3), whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, in respect of a motor vehicle, other than a transport vehicle, shall, subject to 
the provisions contained in this Act, be valid only for a period of fifteen years from the date of issue of 
such certificate and shall be renewable. 

27 
 
(8) An application by or on behalf of the owner of a motor vehicle, other than a transport vehicle, for 
the renewal of a certificate of registration shall be made within such period and in such form, containing 
such particulars and information as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(9) An application referred to in sub-section (8) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 
(10) Subject to the provisions of section 56, the registering authority may, on receipt of an application 
under sub-section (8), renew the certificate of registration for a period of five years and intimate the fact 
to the original registering authority, if it is not the original registering authority. 
(11) If the owner fails to make an application under sub-section (1), or, as the case may be, under  
sub-section (8) within the period prescribed, the registering authority may, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case, require the owner to pay, in lieu of any action that may be taken against him 
under section 177, such amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be prescribed under  
sub- section (13):  
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the owner where the owner fails to pay 
the said amount. 
(12) Where the owner has paid the amount under sub-section (11), no action shall be taken against 
him under section 177. 
(13) For the purposes of sub-section (11), the State Government may prescribe different amounts 
having regard to the period of delay on the part of the owner in making an application under  
sub-section (1) or sub-section (8). 
(14) An application for the issue of a duplicate certificate of registration shall be made to the 1[last 
registering authority] in such form, containing such particulars and information along with such fee as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
42. Special provision for registration of motor vehicles of diplomatic officers, etc.—(1) Where an 
application for registration of a motor vehicle is made under sub-section (1) of section 41 by or on behalf 
of any diplomatic officer or consular officer, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) 
or sub-section (6) of that section, the registering authority shall register the vehicle in such manner and in 
accordance with such procedure as may be provided by rules made in this behalf by the Central 
Government under sub-section (3) and shall assign to the vehicle for display thereon a special registration 
mark in accordance with the provisions contained in those rules and shall issue a certificate (hereafter in 
this section referred to as the certificate of registration) that the vehicle has been registered under this 
section; and any vehicle so registered shall not, so long as it remains the property of any diplomatic 
officer or consular officer, require to be registered otherwise under this Act. 
(2) If any vehicle registered under this section ceases to be the property of any diplomatic officer or 
consular officer, the certificate of registration issued under this section shall also cease to be effective, and 
the provisions of sections 39 and 40 shall thereupon apply. 
(3) The Central Government may make rules for the registration of motor vehicles belonging to 
diplomatic officers and consular officers regarding the procedure to be followed by the registering 
authority for registering such vehicles, the form in which the certificates of registration of such vehicles 
are to be issued, the manner in which such certificates of registration are to be sent to the owners of the 
vehicles and the special registration marks to be assigned to such vehicles. 
(4) For the purposes of this section, “diplomatic officer” or “consular officer” means any person who 
is recognised as such by the Central Government and if any question arises as to whether a person is or is 
not such an officer, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. 
43. Temporary registration.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 40 the owner of a 
motor vehicle may apply to any registering authority or other prescribed authority to have the vehicle 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 11, for “original registering authority” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

28 
 
temporarily registered in the prescribed manner and for the issue in the prescribed manner of a temporary 
certificate of registration and a temporary registration mark. 
(2) A registration made under this section shall be valid only for a period not exceeding one month, 
and shall not be renewable: 
Provided that where a motor vehicle so registered is a chassis to which a body has not been attached 
and the same is detained in a workshop beyond the said period of one month for being fitted 1[with a body 
or any unforeseen circumstances beyond the control of the owner], the period may, on payment of such 
fees, if any, as may be prescribed, be extended by such further period or periods as the registering 
authority or other prescribed authority, as the case may be, may allow. 
2[(3) In a case where the motor vehicle is held under hire-purchase agreement, lease or hypothecation, 
the registering authority or other prescribed authority shall issue a temporary certificate of registration of 
such vehicle, which shall incorporate legibly and prominently the full name and address of the person 
with whom such agreement has been entered into by the owner.] 
44. Production of vehicle at the time of registration.—The registering authority shall before 
proceeding to register a motor vehicle or renew the certificate of registration in respect of a motor vehicle, 
other than a transport vehicle, require the person applying for registration of the vehicle or, as the case 
may be, for renewing the certificate of registration to produce the vehicle either before itself or such 
authority as the State Government may by order appoint in order that the registering authority may satisfy 
itself that the particulars contained in the application are true and that the vehicle complies with the 
requirements of this Act and of the rules made thereunder. 
45. Refusal of registration or renewal of the certificate of registration.—The registering authority 
may, by order, refuse to register any motor vehicle, or renew the certificate of registration in respect of a 
motor vehicle (other than a transport vehicle), if in either case, the registering authority has reason to 
believe that it is a stolen motor vehicle or the vehicle is mechanically defective or fails to comply with the 
requirements of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, or if the applicant fails to furnish particulars of 
any previous registration of the vehicle or furnishes inaccurate particulars in the application for 
registration of the vehicle or, as the case may be, for renewal of the certificate or registration thereof and 
the registering authority shall furnish the applicant whose vehicle is refused registration, or whose 
application for renewal of the certificate of registration is refused, a copy of such order, together with the 
reasons for such refusal. 
46. Effectiveness in India of registration.—Subject to the provisions of section 47, a motor vehicle 
registered in accordance with this Chapter in any State shall not require to be registered elsewhere in 
India and a certificate of registration issued or in force under this Act in respect of such vehicle shall be 
effective throughout India. 
47. Assignment of new registration mark on removal to another State.—(1) When a motor 
vehicle registered in one State has been kept in another State, for a period exceeding twelve months, the 
owner of the vehicle shall, within such period and in such form containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, apply to the registering authority, within whose jurisdiction the 
vehicle then is, for the assignment of a new registration mark and shall present the certificate of 
registration to that registering authority: 
Provided that an application under this sub-section shall be accompanied— 
(i) by the no objection certificate obtained under section 48, or 
(ii) in a case where no such certificate has been obtained, by— 
(a) the receipt obtained under sub-section (2) of section 48; or 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 12, for “with a body” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

29 
 
(b) the postal acknowledgement received by the owner of the vehicle if he has sent an 
application in this behalf by registered post acknowledgement due to the registering authority 
referred to in section 48, 
together with a declaration that he has not received any communication from such authority refusing to 
grant such certificate or requiring him to comply with any direction subject to which such certificate may 
be granted: 
Provided further that, in a case where a motor vehicle is held under a hire-purchase, lease or 
hypothecation agreement, an application under this sub-section shall be accompanied by a no objection 
certificate from the person with whom such agreement has been entered into, and the provisions of 
section 51, so far as may be, regarding obtaining of such certificate from the person with whom such 
agreement has been entered into, shall apply. 
(2) The registering authority, to which application is made under sub-section (1), shall after making 
such verification, as it thinks fit, of the returns, if any, received under section 62, assign the vehicle a 
registration mark as specified in sub-section (6) of section 41 to be displayed and shown thereafter on the 
vehicle and shall enter the mark upon the certificate of registration before returning it to the applicant and 
shall, in communication with the registering authority by whom the vehicle was previously registered, 
arrange for the transfer of the registration of the vehicle from the records of that registering authority to its 
own records. 
(3) Where a motor vehicle is held under a hire-purchase or lease or hypothecation agreement, the 
registering authority shall, after assigning the vehicle a registration mark under sub-section (2), inform the 
person whose name has been specified in the certificate of registration as the person with whom the 
registered owner has entered into the hire-purchase or lease or hypothecation agreement (by sending to 
such person a notice by registered post acknowledgement due at the address of such person entered in the 
certificate of registration the fact of assignment of the said registration mark). 
(4) A State Government may make rules under section 65 requiring the owner of a motor vehicle not 
registered within the State, which is brought into or is for the time being in the State, to furnish to the 
prescribed authority in the State such information with respect to the motor vehicle and its registration as 
may be prescribed. 
(5) If the owner fails to make an application under sub-section (1) within the period prescribed, the 
registering authority may, having regard to the circumstances of the case, require the owner to pay, in lieu 
of any action that may be taken against him under section 177, such amount not exceeding one hundred 
rupees as may be prescribed under sub-section (7): 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the owner where the owner fails to pay 
the said amount. 
(6) Where the owner has paid the amount under sub-section (5), no action shall be taken against him 
under section 177. 
(7) For the purposes of sub-section (5), the State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay on the part of the owner in making an application under sub-section (1). 
48. No objection certificate.—(1) The owner of a motor vehicle when applying for the assignment of 
a new registration mark under sub-section (1) of section 47, or where the transfer of a motor vehicle is to 
be effected in a State other than the State of its registration, the transferor of such vehicle when reporting 
the transfer under sub-section (1) of section 50, shall make an application in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government to the registering authority by which the vehicle 
was registered for the issue of a certificate (hereafter in this section referred to as the no objection 
certificate), to the effect that the registering authority has no objection for assigning a new registration 
mark to the vehicle or, as the case may be, for entering the particulars of the transfer of ownership in the 
certificate of registration. 
(2) The registering authority shall, on receipt of an application under sub-section (1), issue a receipt in 
such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 

30 
 
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the registering authority may, after making 
such inquiry and requiring the applicant to comply with such directions as it deems fit and within thirty 
days of the receipt thereof, by order in writing, communicate to the applicant that it has granted or refused 
to grant the no objection certificate: 
Provided that a registering authority shall not refuse to grant the no objection certificate unless it has 
recorded in writing the reasons for doing so and a copy of the same has been communicated to the 
applicant. 
(4) Where within a period of thirty days referred to in sub-section (3), the registering authority does 
not refuse to grant the no objection certificate or does not communicate the refusal to the applicant, the 
registering authority shall be deemed to have granted the no objection certificate. 
(5) Before granting or refusing to grant the no objection certificate, the registering authority shall 
obtain a report in writing from the police that no case relating to the theft of the motor vehicle concerned 
has been reported or is pending, verify whether all the amounts due to Government including road tax in 
respect of that motor vehicle have been paid and take into account such other factors as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government. 
1[(6)The owner of the vehicle shall also inform at the earliest, in writing, the registering authority 
about the theft of his vehicle together with the name of the police station where the theft report was 
lodged, and the registering authority shall take into account such report while disposing of any 
application for no objection   certification, registration, transfer of ownership or issue   of duplicate 
registration certificate.] 
49. Change of residence or place of business.—(1) If the owner of a motor vehicle ceases to reside 
or have his place of business at the address recorded in the certificate of registration of the vehicle, he 
shall, within thirty days of any such change of address, intimate in such form accompanied by such 
documents as may be prescribed by the Central Government, his new address, to the registering authority 
by which the certificate of registration was issued, or, if the new address is within the jurisdiction of 
another registering authority, to that other registering authority, and shall at the same time forward the 
certificate of registration to the registering authority or, as the case may be, to the other registering 
authority in order that the new address may be entered therein. 
(2) If the owner of a motor vehicle fails to intimate his new address to the concerned registering 
authority within the period specified in sub-section (1), the registering authority may, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case, require the owner to pay, in lieu of any action that may be taken against him 
under section 177 such amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be prescribed under  
sub-section (4): 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the owner where he fails to pay the said 
amount. 
(3) Where a person has paid the amount under sub-section (2), no action shall be taken against him 
under section 177. 
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (2), a State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay in intimating his new address. 
(5) On receipt of intimation under sub-section (1), the registering authority may, after making such 
verification as it may think fit, cause the new address to be entered in the certificate of registration. 
(6) A registering authority other than the original registering authority making any such entry shall 
communicate the altered address to the original registering authority. 
(7) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply where the change of the address recorded in the certificate 
of registration is due to a temporary absence not intended to exceed six months in duration or where the 
motor vehicle is neither used nor removed from the address recorded in the certificate of registration. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 13 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

31 
 
50. Transfer of ownership.—(1) Where the ownership of any motor vehicle registered under this 
Chapter is transferred,— 
(a) the transferor shall,— 
(i) in the case of a vehicle registered within the same State, within fourteen days of the 
transfer, report the fact of transfer, in such form with such documents and in such manner, as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction 
the transfer is to be effected and shall simultaneously send a copy of the said report to the 
transferee; and 
(ii) in the case of a vehicle registered outside the State, within forty-five days of the transfer, 
forward to the registering authority referred to in sub-clause (i)— 
(A) the no objection certificate obtained under section 48; or 
(B) in a case where no such certificate has been obtained,— 
(I) the receipt obtained under sub-section (2) of section 48; or 
(II) the postal acknowledgement received by the transferred if he has sent an 
application in this behalf by registered post acknowledgement due to the registering 
authority referred to in section 48, 
together with a declaration that he has not received any communication from such authority 
refusing to grant such certificate or requiring him to comply with any direction subject to which 
such certificate may be granted; 
(b) the transferee shall, within thirty days of the transfer, report the transfer to the registering 
authority within whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the vehicle is 
normally kept, as the case may be, and shall forward the certificate of registration to that registering 
authority together with the prescribed fee and a copy of the report received by him from the transferor 
in order that particulars of the transfer of ownership may be entered in the certificate of registration. 
(2) Where— 
(a) the person in whose name a motor vehicle stands registered dies, or 
(b) a motor vehicle has been purchased or acquired at a public auction conducted by, or on behalf 
of, Government, 
the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicle or, as the case may be, who has purchased or 
acquired the motor vehicle, shall make an application for the purpose of transferring the ownership of the 
vehicle in his name, to the registering authority in whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of 
business where the vehicle is normally kept, as the case may be, in such manner, accompanied with such 
fee, and within such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) If the transferor or the transferee fails to report to the registering authority the fact of transfer 
within the period specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1), as the case may be, or if the 
person who is required to make an application under sub-section (2) (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the other person) fails to make such application within the period prescribed, the registering authority 
may, having regard to the circumstances of the case, require the transferor or the transferee, or the other 
person, as the case may be, to pay, in lieu of any action that may be taken against him under section 177 
such amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be prescribed under sub-section (5): 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the transferor or the transferee or the 
other person, as the case may be, where he fails to pay the said amount. 
(4) Where a person has paid the amount under sub-section (3), no action shall be taken against him 
under section 177. 
(5) For the purposes of sub-section (3), a State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay on the part of the transferor or the transferee in reporting the fact of transfer 
of ownership of the motor vehicle or of the other person in making the application under sub-section (2). 

32 
 
(6) On receipt of a report under sub-section (1), or an application under sub-section (2), the 
registering authority may cause the transfer of ownership to be entered in the certificate of registration. 
(7) A registering authority making any such entry shall communicate the transfer of ownership to the 
transferor and to the original registering authority, if it is not the original registering authority. 
51. Special provisions regarding motor vehicle subject to hire-purchase agreement, etc.—(1) 
Where an application for registration of a motor vehicle which is held under a hire-purchase, lease or 
hypothecation agreement (hereafter in this section referred to as the said agreement) is made, the 
registering authority shall make an entry in the certificate of registration regarding the existence of the 
said agreement. 
(2) Where the ownership of any motor vehicle registered under this Chapter is transferred and the 
transferee enters into the said agreement with any person, the 1[last registering authority] shall, on receipt 
of an application in such form as the Central Government may prescribe from the parties to the said 
agreement, make an entry as to the existence of the said agreement in the certificate of registration 2[and 
an intimation in this behalf shall be sent to the original registering authority if the last registering 
authority is not the original registering authority]. 
(3) Any entry made under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), may be cancelled by the 1[last registering 
authority] on proof of the termination of the said agreement by the parties concerned on an application 
being made in such form as the Central Government may prescribe2[and an intimation in this behalf 
shall be sent to the original registering authority if the last registering authority is not the original 
registering authority]. 
(4) No entry regarding the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle which is held under the said 
agreement shall be made in the certificate of registration except with the written consent of the person 
whose name has been specified in the certificate of registration as the person with whom the registered 
owner has entered into the said agreement. 
(5) Where the person whose name has been specified in the certificate of registration as the person 
with whom the registered owner has entered into the said agreement, satisfies the registering authority 
that he has taken possession of the vehicle3[from the registered owner] owing to the default of the 
registered owner under the provisions of the said agreement and that the registered owner refuses to 
deliver the certificate of registration or has absconded, such authority may, after giving the registered 
owner an opportunity to make such representation as he may wish to make (by sending to him a notice by 
registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of registration) and 
notwithstanding that the certificate of registration is not produced before it, cancel the certificate and 
issuea fresh certificate of registration in the name of the person with whom the registered owner has 
entered into the said agreement: 
Provided that a fresh certificate of registration shall not be issued in respect of a motor vehicle, unless 
such person pays the prescribed fee:  
Provided further that a fresh certificate of registration issued in respect of a motor vehicle, other than 
a transport vehicle, shall be valid only for the remaining period for which the certificate cancelled under 
this sub-section would have been in force. 
(6) The registered owner shall, before applying to the appropriate authority, for the renewal of a 
permit under section 81 or for the issue of duplicate certificate of registration under sub-section (14) of 
section 41, or for the assignment of a new registration mark 4[under section 47, or removal of the vehicle 
to another State, or at the time of conversion of the vehicle from one class to another, or for issue of no 
objection certificate under section 48, or for change of residence or place of business under section 49, or 
for the alteration of the vehicle under section 52, make an application] to the person with whom the 
registered owner has entered into the said agreement (such person being hereafter in this section referred 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 14, for “original registering authority” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Added. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “under section 47, make an application” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

33 
 
to as the financier) for the issue of a no objection certificate (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
certificate). 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section and sub-sections (8) and (9), “appropriate 
authority” in relation to any permit means the authority which is authorised by this Act to renew such 
permit and, in relation to registration, means the authority which is authorised by this Act to issue 
duplicate certificate of registration or to assign a new registration mark. 
(7) Within seven days of the receipt of an application under sub-section (6), the financier may issue, 
or refuse for reasons which shall be recorded in writing and communicated to the applicant, to issue, the 
certificate applied for and where the financier fails to issue the certificate and also fails to communicate 
the reasons for refusal to issue the certificate to the applicant within the said period of seven days, the 
certificate applied for shall be deemed to have been issued by the financier. 
(8) The registered owner shall, while applying to the appropriate authority for the renewal of any 
permit under section 81, or for the issue of a duplicate certificate of registration under sub-section (14) of 
section 41, or while applying for assignment of a new registration mark under section 47, submit with 
such application the certificate, if any, obtained under sub-section (7) or, where no such certificate has 
been obtained, the communication received from the financier under that sub-section, or, as the case may 
be a declaration that he has not received any communication from the financier within the period of seven 
days specified in that sub-section. 
(9) On receipt of an application for the renewal of any permit or for the issue of duplicate certificate 
of registration or for assignment of a new registration mark in respect of a vehicle which is held under the 
said agreement, the appropriate authority may, subject to the other provisions of this Act,— 
(a) in a case where the financier has refused to issue the certificate applied for, after giving the 
applicant an opportunity of being heard, either— 
(i) renew or refuse to renew the permit, or 
(ii) issue or refuse to issue the duplicate certificate of registration, or 
(iii) assign or refuse to assign a new registration mark; 
(b) in any other case,— 
(i) renew the permit, or 
(ii) issue duplicate certificate of registration, or 
(iii) assign a new registration mark. 
(10) A registering authority making an entry in the certificate of registration regarding— 
(a) hire-purchase, lease or hypothecation agreement of a motor vehicle, or 
(b) the cancellation under sub-section (3) of an entry, or 
(c) recording transfer of ownership of motor vehicle, or 
(d) any alteration in a motor vehicle, or 
(e) suspension or cancellation of registration of a motor vehicle, or 
(f) change of address, 
shall communicate1[by registered post acknowledgment due] to the financier that such entry has been 
made. 
2[(11) A registering authority registering the new vehicle, or issuing the duplicate certificate of 
registration or a no objectioncertificate or a temporary certificate of registration, or issuing or 
renewing, a fitness certificate or substituting entries relating toanother motor vehicle in the 
permit, shall intimate the financierof such transaction. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s.14 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s.14, ibid., for sub-section (11) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

34 
 
(12)The registering authority where it is not the original registering authority, when making 
entry under sub-section (1)or sub-section (2),or cancelling the said entry under sub-section (3) or 
issuing the fresh certificate of registration under sub-section (5) shall communicate the same to the 
original registering authority.] 
1[52. Alteration in motor vehicle.— (1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall so alter the vehicle that 
the particulars contained in the certificate of registration are at variance with those originally specified by 
the manufacturer: 
Provided that where the owner of a motor vehicle makes modification of the engine, or any part 
thereof, of a vehicle for facilitating its operation by different type of fuel or source of energy including 
battery, compressed natural gas, solar power, liquid petroleum gas or any other fuel or source of energy, 
by fitment of a conversion kit, such modification shall be carried out subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided further that the Central Government may prescribe specifications, conditions for approval, 
retrofitment and other related matters for such conversion kits: 
Provided also that the Central Government may grant exemption for alteration of vehicles in a manner 
other than specified above, for any specific purpose. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, authorise, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, and 
permit any person owning not less than ten transport vehicles to alter any vehicle owned by him so as to 
replace the engine thereof with engine of the same make and type, without the approval of registering 
authority. 
(3) Where any alteration has been made in motor vehicle without the approval of registering authority 
or by reason of replacement of its engine without such approval under sub-section (2), the owner of the 
vehicle shall, within fourteen days of the making of the alteration, report the alteration to the registering 
authority within whose jurisdiction he resides and shall forward the certificate of registration to that 
authority together with the prescribed fee in order that particulars of registration may be entered therein. 
(4) A registering authority other than the original registering authority making any such entry shall 
communicate the details of the entry to the original registering authority. 
(5) Subject to the provisions made under sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4), no person holding a vehicle 
under a hire-purchase agreement shall make any alteration to the vehicle except with the written consent 
of the registered owner. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “alteration” means a change in the structure of a 
vehicle which results in a change in its basic feature.] 
53. Suspension of registration.—(1) If any registering authority or other prescribed authority has 
reason to believe that any motor vehicle within its jurisdiction— 
(a) is in such a condition that its use in a public place would constitute a danger to the public, or 
that it fails to comply with the requirements of this Act or of the rules made thereunder, or 
(b) has been, or is being, used for hire or reward without a valid permit for being used as such, 
the authority may, after giving the owner an opportunity of making any representation he may wish to 
make (by sending to the owner a notice by registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in 
the certificate of registration), for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend the certificate of registration 
of the vehicle— 
(i) in any case falling under clause (a), until the defects are rectified to its satisfaction; and 
(ii) in any case falling under clause (b), for a period not exceeding four months. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2000, s. 2, for section 52 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000). 

35 
 
(2) An authority other than a registering authority shall, when making a suspension order under  
sub-section (1), intimate in writing the fact of such suspension and the reasons therefor to the registering 
authority within whose jurisdiction the vehicle is at the time of the suspension. 
(3) Where the registeration of a motor vehicle has been suspended under sub-section (1), for a 
continuous period of not less than one month, the registering authority, within whose jurisdiction the 
vehicle was when the registration was suspended, shall, if it is not the original registering authority, 
inform that authority of the suspension. 
(4) The owner of a motor vehicle shall, on the demand of a registering authority or other prescribed 
authority which has suspended the certificate of registration of the vehicle under this section, surrender 
the certificate of registration. 
(5) A certificate of registration surrendered under sub-section (4) shall be returned to the owner when 
the order suspending registration has been rescinded and not before. 
54. Cancellation of registration suspended under section 53.—Where the suspension of 
registration of a vehicle under section 53 has continued without interruption for a period of not less than 
six months, the registering authority within whose jurisdiction the vehicle was when the registration was 
suspended, may, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the registration, and if it is not the 
original registering authority, shall forward the certificate of registration to that authority which may 
cancel the registration. 
55. Cancellation of registration.—(1) If a motor vehicle has been destroyed or has been rendered 
permanently incapable of use, the owner shall, within fourteen days or as soon as may be, report the fact 
to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the 
vehicle is normally kept, as the case may be, and shall forward to that authority the certificate of 
registration of the vehicle. 
(2) The registering authority shall, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the registration and 
the certificate of registration, or, if it is not, shall forward the report and the certificate of registration to 
the original registering authority and that authority shall cancel the registration. 
(3) Any registering authority may order the examination of a motor vehicle within its jurisdiction by 
such authority as the State Government may by order appoint and, if, upon such examination and after 
giving the owner an opportunity to make any representation he may wish to make (by sending to the 
owner a notice by registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of 
registration), it is satisfied that the vehicle is in such a condition that it is incapable of being used or its 
use in a public place would constitute a danger to the public and that it is beyond reasonable repair, may 
cancel the registration. 
(4) If a registering authority is satisfied that a motor vehicle has been permanently removed out of 
India, the registering authority shall cancel the registration. 
(5) If a registering authority is satisfied that the registration of a motor vehicle has been obtained on 
the basis of documents which were, or by representation of facts which was, false in any material 
particular, or the engine number or the chassis number embossed thereon are different from such number 
entered in the certificate of registration, the registering authority shall after giving the owner an 
opportunity to make such representation as he may wish to make (by sending to the owner a notice by 
registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of registration), and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing cancel the registration. 
(6) A registering authority cancelling the registration of a motor vehicle under section 54 or under this 
section shall communicate such fact in writing to the owner of the vehicle, and the owner of the vehicle 
shall forthwith surrender to that authority the certificate of registration of the vehicle. 
(7) A registering authority making an order of cancellation under section 54 or under this section 
shall, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the certificate of registration and the entry relating to 
the vehicle in its records, and, if it is not the original registering authority, forward the certificate of 

36 
 
registration to that authority, and that authority shall cancel the certificate of registration and the entry 
relating to the motor vehicle in its records. 
(8) The expression “original registering authority” in this section and in sections 41, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53 
and 54 means the registering authority in whose records the registration of the vehicle is recorded. 
(9) In this section, “certificate of registration” includes a certificate of registration renewed under the 
provisions of this Act. 
56. Certificate of fitness of transport vehicles.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sections 59 and 60, 
a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to be validly registered for the purposes of section 39, unless it 
carries a certificate of fitness in such form containing such particulars and information as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, issued by the prescribed authority, or by an authorised testing 
station mentioned in sub-section (2), to the effect that the vehicle complies for the time being with all the 
requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder: 
Provided that where the prescribed authority or the authorised testing station refuses is issue such 
certificate, it shall supply the owner of the vehicle with its reasons in writing for such refusal. 
(2) The “authorised testing station” referred to in sub-section (1) means a vehicle service station or 
public or private garage which the State Government, having regard to the experience, training and ability 
of the operator of such station or garage and the testing equipment and the testing personnel therein, may 
specify in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government for regulation and control of such 
stations or garages. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a certificate of fitness shall remain effective for such 
period as may be prescribed by the Central Government having regard to the objects of this Act. 
(4) The prescribed authority may for reasons to be recorded in writing cancel a certificate of fitness at 
any time, if satisfied that the vehicle to which it relates no longer complies with all the requirements of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder; and on such cancellation the certificate of registration of the 
vehicle and any permit granted in respect of the vehicle under Chapter V shall be deemed to be suspended 
until a new certificate of fitness has been obtained: 
1[Provided that no such cancellation shall be made by the prescribed authority unless such prescribed 
authority holds such technical qualification as may be prescribed or where the prescribed authority does 
not hold such technical qualification on the basis of the report of an officer having such qualifications.] 
(5) A certificate of fitness issued under this Act shall, while it remains effective, be valid throughout 
India. 
57. Appeals.—2[(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the registering authority under section 
41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 55 or 56 may, within thirty days of the date on which he has 
received notice of such order, appeal against the order to the prescribed authority.] 
(2) The appellate authority shall give notice of the appeal to the original authority and after giving an 
opportunity to the original authority and the appellant to be heard in the appeal pass such orders as it 
thinks fit.  
58. Special provisions in regard to transport vehicles.—(1) The Central Government may, having 
regard to the number, nature and size of the tyres attached to the wheels of a transport vehicle, (other than 
a motorcab), and its make and model and other relevant considerations, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify, in relation to each make and model of a transport vehicle, the 3[maximum gross vehicle  
weight] of such vehicle and the maximum safe axle weight of each axle of such vehicle. 
(2) A registering authority, when registering a transport vehicle, other than a motorcab, shall enter in 
the record of registration and shall also enter in the certificate of registration of the vehicle the following 
particulars, namely:— 
(a) the unladen weight of the vehicle; 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 16 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s.17, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “maximum safe laden weight” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

37 
 
(b) the number, nature and size of the tyres attached to each wheel; 
(c) the gross vehicle weight of the vehicle and the registered axle weights pertaining to the several 
axles thereof; and 
(d) if the vehicle is used or adapted to be used for the carriage of passengers solely or in addition 
to goods, the number of passengers for whom accommodation is provided, 
and the owner of the vehicle shall have the same particulars exhibited in the prescribed manner on the 
vehicle. 
(3) There shall not be entered in the certificate of registration of any such vehicle any gross vehicle 
weight or a registered axle weight of any of the axles different from that specified in the notification 
under sub-section (1) in relation to the make and model of such vehicle and to the number, nature and size 
of the tyres attached to its wheels: 
Provided that where it appears to the Central Government that heavier weights than those specified in 
the notification under sub-section (1) may be permitted in a particular locality for vehicles of a particular 
type, the Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette direct that the provisions of this  
sub-section shall apply with such modifications as may be specified in the order. 
1*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
(5) In order that the gross vehicle weight entered in the certificate of registration of a vehicle may be 
revised in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3), the registering authority may require the 
owner of transport vehicle in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed to produce the 
certificate of registration within such time as may be specified by the registering authority. 
59. Power to fix the age limit of motor vehicle.—(1) The Central Government may, having regard 
to the public safety, convenience and objects of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
the life of a motor vehicle reckoned from the date of its manufacture, after the expiry of which the motor 
vehicle shall not be deemed to comply with the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder: 
Provided that the Central Government may specify different ages for different classes or different 
types of motor vehicles. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government may, having 
regard to the purpose of a motor vehicle, such as, display or use for the purposes of a demonstration in 
any exhibition, use for the purposes of technical research or taking part in a vintage car rally, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, by a general or special order, subject to such conditions as 
may be specified in such notification, any class or type of motor vehicle from the operation of  
sub-section (1) for the purpose to be stated in the notification. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 56, no prescribed authority or authorised testing 
station shall grant a certificate of fitness to a motor vehicle in contravention of the provisions of any 
notification issued under sub-section (1). 
60. Registration of vehicles belonging to the Central Government.—(1) Such authority as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, may register any motor vehicle 
which is the property or for the time being under the exclusive control of the Central Government and is 
used for Government purposes relating to the defence of the country and unconnected with any 
commercial enterprise and any vehicle so registered shall not, so long as it remains the property or under 
the exclusive control of the Central Government, require to be registered otherwise under this Act. 
(2) The authority registering a vehicle under sub-section (1) shall assign a registration mark in 
accordance with the provisions contained in the rules made in this behalf by the Central Government and 
shall issue a certificate in respect of that vehicle to the effect that such vehicle complies for the time being 
with all the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder and that the vehicle has been 
registered under this section. 
(3) A vehicle registered under this section shall carry the certificate issued under sub-section (2). 
                                                          
1. Sub-section (4) omitted by Act 27 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000). 

38 
 
(4) If a vehicle registered under this section ceases to be the property or under the exclusive control of 
the Central Government, the provisions of sections 39 and 40 shall thereupon apply. 
(5) The authority registering a vehicle under sub-section (1) shall furnish to any State Government all 
such information regarding the general nature, overall dimensions and axle weights of the vehicle as the 
State Government may at any time require. 
61. Application of Chapter to trailers.—(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the 
registration of trailers as they apply to the registration of any other motor vehicle. 
(2) The registration mark assigned to a trailer shall be displayed in such manner on the side of the 
drawing vehicle, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) No person shall drive a motor vehicle to which a trailer is or trailers are attached unless the 
registration mark of the motor vehicle so driven is displayed on the trailer or on the last trailer in the train, 
as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
62. Information regarding stolen and recovered motor vehicles to be furnished by the police to 
the State Transport Authority.—The State Government may, if it thinks necessary or expedient so to do 
in the public interest, direct the submission by the Inspector General of Police (by whatever designation 
called) and such other police officers as the State Government may specify in this behalf, of such returns 
containing the information regarding vehicles which have been stolen and stolen vehicles which have 
been recovered of which the police are aware, to the State Transport Authority, and may prescribe the 
form in which and the period within which such returns shall be made. 
63. Maintenance of State Registers of Motor Vehicles.—(1) Each State Government shall maintain 
in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government a register to be known as the State Register 
of Motor Vehicle, in respect of the motor vehicles in that State, containing the following particulars, 
namely:— 
(a) registration numbers; 
(b) years of manufacture; 
(c) classes and types; 
(d) names and addresses of registered owners; and 
(e) such other particulars as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(2) Each State Government shall supply to the Central Government1[if so desired by it] a printed copy 
of the State Register of Motor Vehicles and shall also inform the Central Government without delay of all 
additions to and other amendments in such register made from time to time. 
(3) The State Register of Motor Vehicles shall be maintained in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the State Government. 
64. Power of Central Government to make rules.—The Central Government may make rules to 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the period within which and the form in which an application shall be made and the 
documents, particulars and information it shall accompany under sub-section (1) of section 41; 
(b) the form in which the certificate of registration shall be made and the particulars and 
information it shall contain and the manner in which it shall be issued under sub-section (3) of  
section 41; 
(c) the form and manner in which the particulars of the certificate of registration shall be entered 
in the records of the registering authority under sub-section (5) of section 41; 
(d) the manner in which and the form in which the registration mark, the letters and figures and 
other particulars referred to in sub-section (6) of section 41 shall be displayed and shown; 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 19 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

39 
 
(e) the period within which and the form in which the application shall be made and the 
particulars and information it shall contain under sub-section (8) of section 41; 
(f) the form in which the application referred to in sub-section (14) of section 41 shall be made, 
the particulars and information it shall contain and the fee to be charged; 
(g) the form in which the period within which the application referred to in sub-section (1) of 
section 47 shall be made and the particulars it shall contain; 
(h) the form in which and the manner in which the application for “No Objection Certificate” 
shall be made under sub-section (1) of section 48 and the form of receipt to be issued under  
sub-section (2) of section 48; 
(i) the matters that are to be complied with by an applicant before no objection certificate may be 
issued under section 48; 
(j) the form in which the intimation of change of address shall be made under sub-section (1) of 
section 49 and the documents to be submitted along with the application; 
(k) the form in which and the manner in which the intimation of transfer of ownership shall be 
made under sub-section (1) of section 50 or under sub-section (2) of section 50 and the document to 
be submitted along with the application; 
(l) the form in which the application under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 51 shall 
be made; 
(m) the form in which the certificate of fitness shall be issued under sub-section (1) of section 56 
and the particulars and information it shall contain; 
(n) the period for which the certificate of fitness granted or renewed under section 56 shall be 
effective; 
(o) the fees to be charged for the issue or renewal or alteration of certificates of registration, for 
making an entry regarding transfer of ownership on a certificate of registration, for making or 
cancelling an endorsement in respect of agreement of hire-purchase or lease or hypothecation on a 
certificate of registration, for certificates of fitness for registration marks, and for the examination or 
inspection of motor vehicles, and the refund of such fees. 
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed by the Central Government.  
65. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters specified in  
section 64. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter (the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees); 
(b) the appointment, functions and jurisdiction of registering and other prescribed authorities; 
(c) the exemption of road-rollers, graders and other vehicles designed and used solely for the 
construction, repair and cleaning of roads from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter and the 
rules made thereunder and the conditions governing such exemption; 
(d) the issue or renewal of certificates of registration and fitness and duplicates of such 
certificates to replace the certificates lost, destroyed or mutilated; 
(e) the production of certificates of registration before the registering authority for the revision of 
entries therein of particulars relating to the gross vehicle weight; 
(f) the temporary registration of motor vehicles, and the issue of temporary certificate of 
registration and marks; 

40 
 
(g) the manner in which the particulars referred to in sub-section (2) of section 58 and other 
prescribed particulars shall be exhibited; 
(h) the exemption of prescribed persons or prescribed classes of persons from payment of all or 
any portion of the fees payable under this Chapter; 
(i) the forms, other than those prescribed by the Central Government, to be used for the purpose 
of this Chapter; 
(j) the communication between registering authorities of particulars of certificates of registration 
and by owners of vehicles registered outside the State of particulars of such vehicles and of their 
registration; 
(k) the amount or amounts under sub-section (13) of section 41 or sub-section (7) of section 47 or 
sub-section (4) of section 49 or sub-section (5) of section 50; 
(l) the extension of the validity of certificates of fitness pending consideration of applications for 
their renewal; 
(m) the exemption from the provisions of this Chapter, and the conditions and fees for exemption, 
of motor vehicles in the possession of dealers; 
(n) the form in which and the period within which the return under section 62 shall be sent; 
(o) the manner in which the State Register of Motor Vehicles shall be maintained under  
section 63; 
(p) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V 
CONTROL OF TRANSPORT VEHICLES 
66. Necessity for permits.—(1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit the use of the 
vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether or not such vehicle is actually carrying any 
passengers or goods save in accordance with the conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a 
Regional or State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorising him the use of the vehicle 
in that place in the manner in which the vehicle is being used: 
Provided that a stage carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the 
permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a contract carriage: 
Provided further that a stage carriage permit may, subject to any conditions that may be specified in 
the permit, authorise the use of the vehicle as a goods carriage either when carrying passengers or not: 
Provided also that a goods carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the 
permit, authorise the use of the vehicle for the carriage of goods for or in connection with a trade or 
business carried on by him. 
(2) The holder of a goods carriage permit may use the vehicle, for the drawing of any public or semi-
trailer not owned by him, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 
1[Provided that the holder of a permit of any articulated vehicle may use the prime-mover of that 
articulated vehicle for any other semi-trailor:] 
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply— 
(a) to any transport vehicle owned by the Central Government or a State Government and used 
for Government purposes unconnected with any commercial enterprise; 
(b) to any transport vehicle owned by a local authority or by a person acting under contract with a 
local authority and used solely for road cleansing, road watering or conservancy purposes; 
(c) to any transport vehicle used solely for police, fire brigade or ambulance purposes; 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 54 of 1994, s. 20 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

41 
 
(d) to any transport vehicle used solely for the conveyance of corpses and the mourners 
accompanying the corpses; 
(e) to any transport vehicle used for towing a disabled vehicle or for removing goods from a 
disabled vehicle to a place of safety; 
(f) to any transport vehicle used for any other public purpose as may be prescribed by the State 
Government in this behalf; 
(g) to any transport vehicle used by a person who manufactures or deals in motor vehicles or 
builds bodies for attachment to chassis, solely for such purposes and in accordance with such 
conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf; 
1* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(i) to any goods vehicle, the gross vehicle weight of which does not exceed 3,000 kilograms; 
(j) subject to such conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify, to any transport vehicle purchased in one State and proceeding to a place, situated in 
that State or in any other State, without carrying any passenger or goods; 
(k) to any transport vehicle which has been temporarily registered under section 43 while 
proceeding empty to any place for the purpose of registration of the vehicle; 
2* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(m) to any transport vehicle which, owing to flood, earthquake or any other natural calamity, 
obstruction on road, or unforeseen circumstances is required to be diverted through any other route, 
whether within or outside the State, with a view to enabling it to reach its destination; 
(n) to any transport vehicle used for such purposes as the Central or State Government may, by 
order, specify; 
(o) to any transport vehicle which is subject to a hire-purchase, lease or hypothecation agreement 
and which owing to the default of the owner has been taken possession of by or on behalf of, the 
person with whom the owner has entered into such agreement, to enable such motor vehicle to reach 
its destination; or 
(p) to any transport vehicle while proceeding empty to any place for purpose of repair.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), sub-section (1) shall if the State Government by rule 
made under section 96 so prescribes, apply to any motor vehicle adapted to carry more than nine persons 
excluding the driver.  
67. Power to State Government to control road transport.—(1) A State Government, having 
regard to— 
(a) the advantages offered to the public, trade and industry by the development of motor 
transport, 
(b) the desirability of co-ordinating road and rail transport, 
(c) the desirability of preventing the deterioration of the road system, and 
(d) the desirability of preventing uneconomic competition among holders of permits, 
may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, issue directions both to the State Transport 
Authority and Regional Transport Authority— 
(i) regarding the fixing of fares and freights (including the maximum and minimum in respect 
thereof) for stage carriages, contract carriages and goods carriages; 
                                                          
1. Clause (h) omitted by Act 27 of 2000, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000). 
2. Clause (l) omitted by Act 39 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27-9-2001). 

42 
 
1* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(ii) regarding the prohibition or restriction, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the 
directions, of the conveying of long distance goods traffic generally, or of specified classes of goods 
by goods carriages; 
(iii) regarding any other matter which may appear to the State Government necessary or 
expedient for giving effect to any agreement entered into with the Central Government or any other 
State Government or the Government of any other country relating to the regulation of motor 
transport generally, and in particular to its coordination with other means of transport and the 
conveying of long distance goods traffic: 
Provided that no such notification in respect of the matters referred to in clause (ii) or clause (iii) shall 
be issued unless a draft of the proposed directions is published in the Official Gazette specifying therein a 
date being not less than one month after such publication, on or after which the draft will be taken into 
consideration and any objection or suggestion which may be received has, in consultation with the State 
Transport Authority, been considered after giving the representatives of the interests affected an 
opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any direction under sub-section (1) regarding the fixing of fares and freights for stage carriages, 
contract carriages and goods carriages may provide that such fares or freights shall be inclusive of the tax 
payable by the passengers or the consignors of the goods, as the case may be, to the operators of the stage 
carriages, contract carriages or goods carriages under any law for the time being in force relating to tax on 
passengers and goods. 
68. Transport Authorities.—(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute for the State a State Transport Authority to exercise and discharge the powers and functions 
specified in sub-section (3), and shall in like manner constitute Regional Transport Authorities to exercise 
and discharge throughout such areas (in this Chapter referred to as regions) as may be specified in the 
notification, in respect of each Regional Transport Authority; the powers and functions conferred by or 
under this Chapter on such Authorities: 
Provided that in the Union territories, the Administrator may abstain from constituting any Regional 
Transport Authority. 
(2) A State Transport Authority or a Regional Transport Authority shall consist of a Chairman who 
has had judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an adjudicating 
authority competent to pass any order or take any decision under any law and in the case of a State 
Transport Authority, such other persons (whether officials or not), not being more than four and, in the 
case of a Regional Transport Authority, such other persons (whether officials or not), not being more than 
two, as the State Government may think fit to appoint; but no person who has any financial interest 
whether as proprietor, employee or otherwise in any transport undertaking shall be appointed, or continue 
to be, a member of a State or Regional Transport Authority, and, if any person being a member of any 
such Authority acquires a financial interest in any transport undertaking, he shall within four weeks of so 
doing, give notice in writing to the State Government of the acquisition of such interest and shall vacate 
office: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent any of the members of the State Transport 
Authority or a Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, to preside over a meeting of such 
Authority during the absence of the Chairman, notwithstanding that such member does not possess 
judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an adjudicating authority 
competent to pass any order or take any decision under any law: 
Provided further that the State Government may,— 
(i) where it considers necessary or expedient so to do, constitute the State Transport Authority or 
a Regional Transport Authority for any region so as to consist of only one member who shall be an 
                                                          
1. The proviso omitted by Act 39 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27-9-2001). 

43 
 
official with judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an 
adjudicating authority competent to pass any order or take any decision under any law; 
(ii) by rules made in this behalf, provide for the transaction of business of such authorities in the 
absence of the Chairman or any other member and specify the circumstances under which, and the 
manner in which, such business could be so transacted: 
Provided also that nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as debarring an official (other than an 
official connected directly with the management or operation of a transport undertaking) from being 
appointed or continuing as a member of any such authority merely by reason of the fact that the 
Government employing the official has, or acquires, any financial interest in a transport undertaking. 
(3) The State Transport Authority and every Regional Transport Authority shall give effect to any 
directions issued under section 67 and the State Transport Authority shall, subject to such directions and 
save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, exercise and discharge throughout the State the 
following powers and functions, namely:— 
(a) to co-ordinate and regulate the activities and policies of the Regional Transport Authorities, if 
any, of the State; 
(b) to perform the duties of a Regional Transport Authority where there is no such Authority and, 
if it thinks fit or if so required by a Regional Transport Authority, to perform those duties in respect 
of any route common to two or more regions; 
(c) to settle all disputes and decide all matters on which differences of opinion arise between 
Regional Transport Authorities; and 
1[(ca) Government to formulate routes for plying stage carriages;] 
(d) to discharge such other functions as may be prescribed. 
(4) For the purpose of exercising and discharging the powers and functions specified in  
sub-section (3), a State Transport Authority may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, issue 
directions to any Regional Transport Authority, and the Regional Transport Authority shall, in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act, give effect to and be guided by such directions. 
(5) The State Transport Authority and any Regional Transport Authority, if authorised in this behalf 
by rules made under section 96, may delegate such of its powers and functions to such authority or person 
subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions as may be prescribed by the said rules.  
69. General provision as to applications for permits.—(1) Every application for a permit shall be 
made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which it is proposed to use the vehicle or 
vehicles: 
Provided that if it is proposed to use the vehicle or vehicles in two or more regions lying within the 
same State, the application shall be made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which the 
major portion of the proposed route or area lies, and in case the portion of the proposed route or area in 
each of the regions is approximately equal, to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which it 
is proposed to keep the vehicle or vehicles: 
Provided further that if it is proposed to use the vehicle or vehicles in two or more regions lying in 
different States, the application shall be made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which 
the applicant resides or has his principal place of business. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, direct that in the case of any vehicle or vehicles proposed to be used in two or 
more regions lying in different States, the application under that sub-section shall be made to the State 
Transport Authority of the region in which the applicant resides or has his principal place of business. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 22 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

44 
 
70. Application for stage carriage permit.—(1) An application for a permit in respect of a stage 
carriage (in this Chapter referred to as a stage carriage permit) or as a reserve stage carriage shall, as far 
as may be, contain the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) the route or routes or the area or areas to which the application relates; 
(b) the type and seating capacity of each such vehicle; 
(c) the minimum and maximum number of daily trips proposed to be provided and the time-table 
of the normal trips. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, section 72, section 80 and section 102, “trip” 
means a single journey from one point to another, and every return journey shall be deemed to be a 
separate trip; 
(d) the number of vehicles intended to be kept in reserve to maintain the service and to provide 
for special occasions; 
(e) the arrangements intended to be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of the vehicles, 
for the comfort and convenience of passengers and for the storage and safe custody of luggage; 
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed. 
(2) An application referred to in sub-section (1) shall be accompanied by such documents as may be 
prescribed. 
71. Procedure of Regional Transport Authority in considering application for stage carriage 
permit.— (1) A Regional Transport Authority shall, while considering an application for a stage carriage 
permit, have regard to the objects of this Act: 
1*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
(2) A Regional Transport Authority shall refuse to grant a stage carriage permit if it appears from any 
time-table furnished that the provisions of this Act relating to the speed at which vehicles may be driven 
are likely to be contravened: 
Provided that before such refusal an opportunity shall be given to the applicant to amend the time-
table so as to conform to the said provisions. 
(3) (a) The State Government shall, if so directed by the Central Government having regard to the 
number of vehicles, road conditions and other relevant matters, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct a State Transport Authority and a Regional Transport Authority to limit the number of stage 
carriages generally or of any specified type, as may be fixed and specified in the notification, operating on 
city routes in towns with a population of not less than five lakhs. 
(b) Where the number of stage carriages are fixed under clause (a), the Government of the State shall 
reserve in the State certain percentage of stage carriage permits for the scheduled castes and the scheduled 
tribes in the same ratio as in the case of appointments made by direct recruitment to public services in the 
State. 
(c) Where the number of stage carriages are fixed under clause (a), the Regional Transport Authority 
shall reserve such number of permits for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes as may be fixed by 
the State Government under sub-clause (b).  
(d) After reserving such number of permits as is referred to in clause (c), the Regional Transport 
Authority shall in considering an application have regard to the following matters, namely:— 
(i) financial stability of the applicant; 
(ii) satisfactory performance as a stage carriage operator including payment of tax if the applicant 
is or has been an operator of stage carriage service; and 
(iii) such other matters as may be prescribed by the State Government: 
                                                          
1. Proviso omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 23 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

45 
 
Provided that, other conditions being equal, preference shall be given to applications for permits 
from— 
(i) State transport undertakings; 
(ii) co-operative societies registered or deemed to have been registered under any enactment for 
the time being in force; 1*** 
(iii) ex-servicemen; 2[or] 
2[(iv) any other class or category of persons, as the State government may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing consider necessary;] 
3*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
      * 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section “company” means any body corporate, and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
72. Grant of stage carriage permits.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 71, a Regional 
Transport Authority may, on an application made to it under section 70, grant a stage carriage permit in 
accordance with the application or with such modifications as it deems fit or refuse to grant such a permit: 
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any route or area not specified in the 
application. 
(2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a stage carriage permit, may grant the 
permit for a stage carriage of a specified description and may, subject to any rules that may be made 
under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) that the vehicles shall be used only in a specified area, or on a specified route or routes; 
(ii) that the operation of the stage carriage shall be commenced with effect from a specified date; 
(iii) the minimum and maximum number of daily trips to be provided in relation to any route or 
area generally or on specified days and occasions; 
(iv) that copies of the time-table of the stage carriage approved by the Regional Transport 
Authority shall be exhibited on the vehicles and at specified stands and halts on the route or within 
the area; 
(v) that the stage carriage shall be operated within such margins of deviation from the approved 
time-table as the Regional Transport Authority may from time to time specify; 
(vi) that within municipal limits and such other areas and places as may be prescribed, passengers 
or goods shall not be taken up or set down except at specified points; 
(vii) the maximum number of passengers and the maximum weight of luggage that may be 
carried on the stage carriage, either generally or on specified occasions or at specified times and 
seasons; 
(viii) the weight and nature of passengers’ luggage that shall be carried free of charge, the total 
weight of luggage that may be carried in relation to each passenger, and the arrangements that shall 
be made for the carriage of luggage without causing inconvenience to passengers; 
(ix) the rate of charge that may be levied for passengers’ luggage in excess of the free allowance; 
(x) that vehicles of a specified type fitted with body conforming to approved specifications shall 
be used: 
Provided that the attachment of this condition to a permit shall not prevent the continued use, for 
a period of two years from the date of publication of the approved specifications, of any vehicle 
operating on that date; 
                                                          
1.  The word “or” omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 23 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins.by s.23, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Sub-sections (4) and (5) omitted by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

46 
 
(xi) that specified standards of comfort and cleanliness shall be maintained in the vehicles; 
(xii) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried in the stage carriage in addition to or to 
the exclusion of passengers; 
(xiii) that fares shall be charged in accordance with the approved fare table; 
(xiv) that a copy of, or extract from, the fare table approved by the Regional Transport Authority 
and particulars of any special fares or rates of fares so approved for particular occasions shall be 
exhibited on the stage carriage and at specified stands and halts; 
(xv) that tickets bearing specified particulars shall be issued to passengers and shall show the 
fares actually charged and that records of tickets issued shall be kept in a specified manner; 
(xvi) that mails shall be carried on the vehicle subject to such conditions (including conditions as 
to the time in which mails are to be carried and the charges which may be levied) as may be specified; 
(xvii) the vehicles to be kept as reserve by the holder of the permit to maintain the operation and 
to provide for special occasions; 
(xviii) the conditions subject to which vehicle may be used as a contract carriage; 
(xix) that specified arrangements shall be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of 
vehicle; 
(xx) that any specified bus station or shelter maintained by Government or a local authority shall 
be used and that any specified rent or fee shall be paid for such use; 
(xxi) that the conditions of the permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of the 
Regional Transport Authority; 
(xxii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less than one 
month,— 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit; 
(b) attach to the permit further conditions: 
Provided that the conditions specified in pursuance of clause (i) shall not be varied so as to alter 
the distance covered by the original route by more than 24 kilometers, and any variation within such 
limits shall be made only after the Regional Transport Authority is satisfied that such variation will 
serve the convenience of the public and that it is not expedient to grant a separate permit in respect of 
the original route as so varied or any part thereof; 
(xxiii) that the holder of a permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority such periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Government may from time to time prescribe; 
(xxiv) any other conditions which may be prescribed. 
73. Application for contract carriage permit.—An application for a permit in respect of a contract 
carriage (in this Chapter referred to as a contract carriage permit) shall contain the following particulars, 
namely:— 
(a) the type and seating capacity of the vehicle; 
(b) the area for which the permit is required; 
(c) any other particulars which may be prescribed. 
74. Grant of contract carriage permit.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), a Regional 
Transport Authority may, on an application made to it under section 73, grant a contract carriage permit 
in accordance with the application or with such modifications as it deems fit or refuse to grant such a 
permit: 
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any area not specified in the application.  

47 
 
(2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a contract carriage permit, may, subject to 
any rules that may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following 
conditions, namely:— 
(i) that the vehicles shall be used only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes; 
(ii) that except in accordance with specified conditions, no contract of hiring, other than an 
extension or modification of a subsisting contract, may be entered into outside the specified area; 
(iii) the maximum number of passengers and the maximum weight of luggage that may be carried 
on the vehicles, either generally or on specified occasions or at specified times and seasons; 
 (iv) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried in any contract carriage in addition to, 
or to the exclusion of, passengers; 
(v) that, in the case of motor cabs, specified fares or rates of fares shall be charged and a copy of 
the fare table shall be exhibited on the vehicle; 
(vi) that, in the case of vehicles other than motor cabs, specified rates of hiring not exceeding 
specified maximum shall be charged; 
(vii) that, in the case of motor cabs, a special weight of passengers’ luggage shall be carried free 
of charge, and that the charge, if any, for any luggage in excess thereof shall be at a specified rate; 
(viii) that, in the case of motor cabs, a taximeter shall be fitted and maintained in proper working 
order, if prescribed; 
(ix) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less than one month,— 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit; 
(b) attach to the permit further conditions; 
(x) that the conditions of permit shall not be departed from save with the approval of the Regional 
Transport Authority; 
(xi) that specified standards of comfort and cleanliness shall be maintained in the vehicles; 
(xii) that, except in the circumstances of exceptional nature, the plying of the vehicle or carrying 
of the passengers shall not be refused; 
(xiii) any other conditions which may be prescribed. 
(3) (a) The State Government shall, if so directed by the Central Government, having regard to the 
number of vehicles, road conditions and other relevant matters, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct a State Transport Authority and a Regional Transport Authority to limit the number of contract 
carriages generally or of any specified type, as may be fixed and specified in the notification, operating on 
city routes in towns with a population of not less than five lakhs. 
(b) Where the number of contract carriages are fixed under clause (a), the Regional Transport 
Authority shall, in considering an application for the grant of permit in respect of any such contract 
carriage, have regard to the following matters, namely:— 
(i) financial stability of the applicant; 
(ii) satisfactory performance as a contract carriage operator including payment of tax if the 
applicant is or has been an operator of contract carriages; and 
(iii) such other matters as may be prescribed by the State Government: 
Provided that, other conditions being equal, preference shall be given to applications for permits 
from— 
(i) the India Tourism Development Corporation; 
(ii) State Tourism Development Corporations; 
(iii) State Tourism Departments; 

48 
 
(iv) State transport undertakings; 
(v) co-operative societies registered or deemed to have been registered under any enactment for 
the time being in force; 
(vi) ex-servicemen. 
75. Scheme for renting of motor cabs.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make a scheme for the purpose of regulating the business of renting of 1[motor cabs or 
motor cycles to persons desiring to drive either by themselves or through drivers, motor cabs or motor 
cycles] for their own use and for matters connected therewith. 
(2) A scheme made under sub-section (1) may provide for all or any of the following matters,  
namely:— 
(a) licensing of operators under the scheme including grant, renewal and revocation of such 
licences; 
(b) form of application and form of licences and the particulars to be contained therein; 
(c) fee to be paid with the application for such licences; 
(d) the authorities to which the application shall be made; 
(e) condition subject to which such licences may be granted, renewed or revoked; 
(f) appeals against orders of refusal to grant or renew such licences and appeals against orders 
revoking such licences; 
(g) conditions subject to which motor cabs may be rented; 
(h) maintenance of records and inspection of such records; 
(i) such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. 
76. Application for private service vehicle permit.—(1) A Regional Transport Authority may, on 
an application made to it, grant a private service vehicle permit in accordance with the application or with 
such modification as it deems fit or refuse to grant such permit: 
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any area or route not specified in the 
application. 
(2) An application for a permit to use a motor vehicle as a private service vehicle shall contain the 
following particulars, namely:— 
(a) type and seating capacity of the vehicle; 
(b) the area or the route or routes to which the application relates; 
(c) the manner in which it is claimed that the purpose of carrying persons otherwise than for hire 
or reward or in connection with the trade or business carried on by the applicant will be served by the 
vehicle; and 
(d) any other particulars which may be prescribed. 
(3) The Regional Transport Authority if it decides to grant the permit may, subject to any rules that 
may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) that the vehicle be used only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes; 
(ii) the maximum number of persons and the maximum weight of luggage that may be carried; 
(iii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less than one month— 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 24, for “motor cabs to persons desiring to drive the cabs” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

49 
 
(b) attach to the permit further conditions; 
(iv) that the conditions of permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of the 
Regional Transport Authority; 
(v) that specified standards of comforts and cleanliness shall be maintained in the vehicle; 
(vi) that the holder of the permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority such periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Government may, from time to time, specify; and 
(vii) such other conditions as may be prescribed. 
77. Application for goods carriage permit.—An application for a permit to use a motor vehicle for 
the carriage of goods for hire or reward or for the carriage of goods for or in connection with a trade or 
business carried on by the applicant (in this Chapter referred to as a goods carriage permit) shall, as far as 
may be, contain the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) the area or the route or routes to which the application relates; 
(b) the type and capacity of the vehicle; 
(c) the nature of the goods it is proposed to carry; 
(d) the arrangements intended to be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of the vehicle 
and for the storage and safe custody of the goods; 
(e) such particulars as the Regional Transport Authority may require with respect to any business 
as a carrier of goods for hire or reward carried on by the applicant at any time before the making of 
the application, and of the rates charged by the applicant; 
(f) particulars of any agreement, or arrangement, affecting in any material respect the provision 
within the region of the Regional Transport Authority of facilities for the transport of goods for hire 
or reward, entered into by the applicant with any other person by whom such facilities are provided, 
whether within or without the region; 
(g) any other particulars which may be prescribed. 
78. Consideration of application for goods carriage permit.—A Regional Transport Authority 
shall, in considering an application for a goods carriage permit, have regard to the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the nature of the goods to be carried with special reference to their dangerous or hazardous 
nature to human life; 
(b) the nature of the chemicals or explosives to be carried with special reference to the safety to 
human life. 
79. Grant of goods carriage permit.—(1) A Regional Transport Authority may, on an application 
made to it under section 77, grant a goods carriage permit to be valid throughout the State or in 
accordance with the application or with such modifications as it deems fit or refuse to grant such a permit: 
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any area or route not specified in the 
application. 
(2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a goods carriage permit, may grant the 
permit and may, subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or 
more of the following conditions, namely:— 
(i) that the vehicle shall be used only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes; 
(ii) that the gross vehicle weight of any vehicle used shall not exceed a specified maximum; 
(iii) that goods of a specified nature shall not be carried; 
(iv) that goods shall be carried at specified rates; 

50 
 
(v) that specified arrangement shall be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of the 
vehicle and the storage and safe custody of the goods carried; 
(vi) that the holder of the permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority such periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Government may, from time to time, prescribe; 
(vii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving notice of not less than one month,— 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit; 
(b) attach to the permit further conditions; 
(viii) that the conditions of the permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of the 
Regional Transport Authority; 
(ix) any other conditions which may be prescribed. 
(3) The conditions referred to in sub-section (2) may include conditions relating to the packaging and 
carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life. 
80. Procedure in applying for and granting permits.—(1) An application for a permit of any kind 
may be made at any time. 
(2) A 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 66] shall not ordinarily refuse to grant an application for permit of any 
kind made at any time under this Act: 
Provided that the 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any prescribed 
authority referred to in sub-section (1) of section 66] may summarily refuse the application if the grant of 
any permit in accordance with the application would have the effect of increasing the number of stage 
carriages as fixed and specified in a notification in the Official Gazette under clause (a) of sub-section (3) 
of section 71 or of contract carriages as fixed and specified in a notification in the Official Gazette under 
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 74: 
Provided further that where a 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any 
prescribed authority referred to in sub-section (1) of section 66] refuses an application for the grant of a 
permit of any kind under this Act, it shall give to the applicant in writing its reasons for the refusal of the 
same and an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
(3) An application to vary the conditions of any permit, other than a temporary permit, by the 
inclusion of a new route or routes or a new area or by altering the route or routes or area covered by it, or 
in the case of a stage carriage permit by increasing the number of trips above the specified maximum or 
by the variation, extension or curtailment of the route or routes or the area specified in the permit shall be 
treated as an application for the grant of a new permit: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary so to treat an application made by the holder of stage carriage 
permit who provides the only service on any route to increase the frequency of the service so provided 
without any increase in the number of vehicles:  
Provided further that,— 
(i) in the case of variation, the termini shall not be altered and the distance covered by the 
variation shall not exceed twenty-four kilometres; 
(ii) in the case of extension, the distance covered by extension shall not exceed twenty-four 
kilometres from the termini, 
and any such variation or extension within such limits shall be made only after the transport authority is 
satisfied that such variation will serve the convenience of the public and that it is not expedient to grant a 
separate permit in respect of the original route as so varied or extended or any part thereof. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 25, for “Regional Transport Authority” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

51 
 
(4) A 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority referred 
to in sub-section (1) of section 66] may, before such date as may be specified by it in this behalf, replace 
any permit granted by it before the said date by a fresh permit conforming to the provisions of section 72 
or section 74 or section 76 or section 79, as the case may be, and the fresh permit shall be valid for the 
same route or routes or the same area for which the replaced permit was valid: 
Provided that no condition other than a condition which was already attached to the replaced permit 
or which could have been attached thereto under the law in force when that permit was granted shall be 
attached to the fresh permit except with the consent in writing of the holder of the permit. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 81, a permit issued under the provisions of  
sub-section (4) shall be effective without renewal for the remainder of the period during which the 
replaced permit would have been so effective. 
81. Duration and renewal of permits.—(1) A permit other than a temporary permit issued under 
section 87 or a special permit issued under sub-section (8) of section 88 shall be effective 2[from the date 
of issuance or renewal thereof] for a period of five years: 
Provided that where the permit is countersigned under sub-section (1) of section 88, such 
countersignature shall remain effective without renewal for such period so as to synchronise with the 
validity of the primary permit. 
(2) A permit may be renewed on an application made not less than fifteen days before the date of its 
expiry. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Regional Transport Authority or the 
State Transport Authority, as the case may be, may entertain an application for the renewal of a permit 
after the last date specified in that sub-section if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by good 
and sufficient cause from making an application within the time specified. 
(4) The Regional Transport Authority or the State Transport Authority, as the case may be, may reject 
an application for the renewal of a permit on one or more of the following grounds, namely:— 
(a) the financial condition of the applicant as evidenced by insolvency, or decrees for payment of 
debts remaining unsatisfied for a period of thirty days, prior to the date of consideration of the 
application; 
(b) the applicant had been punished twice or more for any of the following offences within twelve 
months reckoned from fifteen days prior to the date of consideration of the application committed as a 
result of the operation of a stage carriage service by the applicant, namely:— 
(i) plying any vehicle— 
(1) without payment of tax due on such vehicle; 
(2) without payment of tax during the grace period allowed for payment of such tax and 
then stop the plying of such vehicle; 
(3) on any unauthorised route; 
(ii) making unauthorised trips: 
Provided that in computing the number of punishments for the purpose of clause (b), any punishment 
stayed by the order of an appellate authority shall not be taken into account: 
Provided further that no application under this sub-section shall be rejected unless an opportunity of 
being heard is given to the applicant. 
(5) Where a permit has been renewed under this section after the expiry of the period thereof, such 
renewal shall have effect from the date of such expiry irrespective of whether or not a temporary permit 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 25, for “Regional Transport Authority” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for “without renewal” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

52 
 
has been granted under clause (d) of section 87, and where a temporary permit has been granted, the fee 
paid in respect of such temporary permit shall be refunded. 
82. Transfer of permit.—(1) Save as provided in sub-section (2), a permit shall not be transferable 
from one person to another except with the permission of the transport authority which granted the permit 
and shall not, without such permission, operate to confer on any person to whom a vehicle covered by the 
permit is transferred any right to use that vehicle in the manner authorised by the permit. 
(2) Where the holder of a permit dies, the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicle covered 
by the permit may, for a period of three months, use the permit as if it had been granted to himself: 
Provided that such person has, within thirty days of the death of the holder, informed the transport 
authority which granted the permit of the death of the holder and of his own intention to use the permit: 
Provided further that no permit shall be so used after the date on which it would have ceased to be 
effective without renewal in the hands of the deceased holder. 
(3) The transport authority may, on application made to it within three months of the death of the 
holder of a permit, transfer the permit to the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicles covered 
by the permit: 
Provided that the transport authority may entertain an application made after the expiry of the said 
period of three months if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by good and sufficient cause from 
making an application within the time specified. 
83. Replacement of vehicles.—The holder of a permit may, with the permission of the authority by 
which the permit was granted, replace any vehicle covered by the permit by any other vehicle of the same 
nature. 
84. General conditions attaching to all permits.—The following shall be conditions of every 
permit— 
(a) that the vehicle to which the permit relates carries valid certificate of fitness issued under 
section 56 and is at all times so maintained as to comply with the requirements of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder; 
(b) that the vehicle to which the permit relates is not driven at a speed exceeding the speed 
permitted under this Act; 
(c) that any prohibition or restriction imposed and any fares or freight fixed by notification made 
under section 67 are observed in connection with the vehicle to which the permit relates; 
(d) that the vehicle to which the permit relates is not driven in contravention of the provisions of 
section 5 or section 113; 
(e) that the provisions of this Act limiting the hours of work of drivers are observed in connection 
with any vehicle or vehicles to which the permit relates; 
(f) that the provisions of Chapters X, XI and XII so far as they apply to the holder of the permit 
are observed; and 
(g) that the name and address of the operator shall be painted or otherwise firmly affixed to every 
vehicle to which the permit relates on the exterior of the body of that vehicle on both sides thereof in 
a colour or colours vividly contrasting to the colour of the vehicle centered as high as practicable 
below the window line in bold letters. 
85. General form of permits.—Every permit issued under this Act shall be complete in itself and 
shall contain all the necessary particulars of the permit and the conditions attached thereto. 
86. Cancellation and suspension of permits.—(1) The transport authority which granted a permit 
may cancel the permit or may suspend it for such period as it thinks fit— 
(a) on the breach of any condition specified in section 84 or of any condition contained in the 
permit, or  

53 
 
(b) if the holder of the permit uses or causes or allows a vehicle to be used in any manner not 
authorised by the permit, or 
(c) if the holder of the permit ceases to own the vehicle covered by the permit, or 
(d) if the holder of the permit has obtained the permit by fraud or misrepresentation, or 
(e) if the holder of the goods carriage permit, fails without reasonable cause, to use the vehicle for 
the purposes for which the permit was granted, or 
(f) if the holder of the permit acquires the citizenship of any foreign country: 
Provided that no permit shall be suspended or cancelled unless an opportunity has been given to the 
holder of the permit to furnish his explanation. 
(2) The transport authority may exercise the powers conferred on it under sub-section (1) in relation 
to a permit granted by any authority or person to whom power in this behalf has been delegated under 
sub-section (5) of section 68 as if the said permit was a permit granted by the transport authority. 
(3) Where a transport authority cancels or suspends a permit, it shall give to the holder in writing its 
reasons for the action taken. 
(4) The powers exercisable under sub-section (1) (other than the power to cancel a permit) by the 
transport authority which granted the permit may be exercised by any authority or person to whom such 
powers have been delegated under sub-section (5) of section 68. 
(5) Where a permit is liable to be cancelled or suspended under clause (a) or clause (b) or clause (e) 
of sub-section (1) and the transport authority is of opinion that having regard to the circumstances of the 
case, it would not be necessary or expedient so to cancel or suspend the permit if the holder of the permit 
agrees to pay a certain sum of money, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
transport authority may, instead of cancelling or suspending the permit, as the case may be, recover from 
the holder of the permit the sum of money agreed upon. 
(6) The powers exercisable by the transport authority under sub-section (5) may, where an appeal has 
been preferred under section 89, be exercised also by the appellate authority. 
(7) In relation to a permit referred to in sub-section (9) of section 88, the powers exercisable under 
sub-section (1) (other than the power to cancel a permit) by the transport authority which granted the 
permit, may be exercised by any transport authority and any authority or persons to whom power in this 
behalf has been delegated under sub-section (5) of section 68, as if the said permit was a permit granted 
by any such authority or persons. 
87. Temporary permits.—(1) A Regional Transport Authority and the State Transport Authority 
may without following the procedure laid down in section 80, grant permits, to be effective for a limited 
period which shall, not in any case exceed four months, to authorise the use of a transport vehicle 
temporarily— 
(a) for the conveyance of passengers on special occasions such as to and from fairs and religious 
gatherings, or  
(b) for the purposes of a seasonal business, or 
(c) to meet a particular temporary need, or 
(d) pending decision on an application for the renewal of a permit,  
and may attach to any such permit such condition as it may think fit: 
Provided that a Regional Transport Authority or, as the case may be, State Transport Authority may, 
in the case of goods carriages, under the circumstances of an exceptional nature, and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, grant a permit for a period exceeding four months, but not exceeding one year. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a temporary permit may be granted 
thereunder in respect of any route or area where— 
(i) no permit could be issued under section 72 or section 74 or section 76 or section 79 in respect 
of that route or area by reason of an order of a court or other competent authority restraining the issue 

54 
 
of the same, for a period not exceeding the period for which the issue of the permit has been so 
restrained; or 
(ii) as a result of the suspension by a court or other competent authority of the permit of any 
vehicle in respect of that route or area, there is no transport vehicle of the same class with a valid 
permit in respect of that route or area, or there is no adequate number of such vehicles in respect of 
that route or area, for a period not exceeding the period of such suspension. 
Provided that the number of transport vehicles in respect of which temporary permits are so granted 
shall not exceed the number of vehicles in respect of which the issue of the permits have been restrained 
or, as the case may be, the permit has been suspended. 
88. Validation of permits for use outside region in which granted.—(1) Except as may be 
otherwise prescribed, a permit granted by the Regional Transport Authority of any one region shall not be 
valid in any other region, unless the permit has been countersigned by the Regional Transport Authority 
of that other rigion, and a permit granted in any one State shall not be valid in any other State unless 
countersigned by the State Transport Authority of that other State or by the Regional Transport Authority 
concerned: 
Provided that a goods carriage permit, granted by the Regional Transport Authority of any one region, 
for any area in any other region or regions within the same State shall be valid in that area without the 
countersignature of the Regional Transport Authority of the other region or of each of the other regions 
concerned: 
Provided further that where both the starting point and the terminal point of a route are situate within 
the same State, but part of such route lies in any other State and the length of such part does not exceed 
sixteen kilometres, the permit shall be valid in the other State in respect of that part of the route which is 
in that other State notwithstanding that such permit has not been countersigned by the State Transport 
Authority or the Regional Transport Authority of that other State: 
Provided also that— 
(a) where a motor vehicle covered by a permit granted in one State is to be used for the purposes 
of defence in any other State, such vehicle shall display a certificate, in such form, and issued by such 
Authority, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, to the 
effect that the vehicle shall be used for the period specified therein exclusively for the purposes of 
defence; and 
(b) any such permit shall be valid in that other State notwithstanding that such permit has not 
been countersigned by the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority of that other 
State. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a permit granted or countersigned by a 
State Transport Authority shall be valid in the whole State or in such regions within the State as may be 
specified in the permit. 
(3) A Regional Transport Authority when countersigning the permit may attach to the permit any 
condition which it might have imposed if it had granted the permit and may likewise vary any condition 
attached to the permit by the authority by which the permit was granted. 
(4) The provisions of this Chapter relating to the grant, revocation and suspension of permits shall 
apply to the grant, revocation and suspension of countersignatures of permits: 
Provided that it shall not be necessary to follow the procedure laid down in section 80 for the grant of 
countersignatures of permits, where the permits granted in any one State are required to be countersigned 
by the State Transport Authority of another State or by the Regional Transport Authority concerned as a 
result of any agreement arrived at between the States after complying with the requirements of  
sub-section (5). 

55 
 
(5) Every proposal to enter into an agreement between the States to fix the number of permits which 
is proposed to be granted or countersigned in respect of each route or area, shall be published by each of 
the State Governments concerned in the Official Gazette and in any one or more of the newspapers in 
regional language circulating in the area or route proposed to be covered by the agreement together with a 
notice of the date before which representations in connection therewith may be submitted, and the date 
not being less than thirty days from the date of publication in the Official Gazette, on which, and the 
authority by which, and the time and place at which, the proposal and any representation received in 
connection therewith will be considered. 
(6) Every agreement arrived at between the States shall, in so far as it relates to the grant of 
countersignature of permits, be published by each of the State Governments concerned in the Official 
Gazette and in any one or more of the newspapers in the regional language circulating in the area or route 
covered by the agreement and the State Transport Authority of the State and the Regional Transport 
Authority concerned shall give effect to it. 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), a Regional Transport Authority of one 
region may issue a temporary permit under section 87 to be valid in another region or State with the 
concurrence, given generally or for the particular occasion, of the Regional Transport Authority of that 
other region or of the State Transport Authority of that other State, as the case may be. 
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), but subject to any rules that may be made 
under this Act by the Central Government, the Regional Transport Authority of any one region or, as the 
case may be, the State Transport Authority, may, for the convenience of the public, 1[grant a special 
permit to any public service vehicle including any vehicle covered] by a permit issued under section 72 
(including a reserve stage carriage) or under section 74 or under sub-section (9) of this section for 
carrying a passenger or passengers for hire or reward under a contract, express or implied, for the use of 
the vehicle as a whole without stopping to pick up or set down along the line of route passengers not 
included in the contract, and in every case where such special permit is granted, the Regional Transport 
Authority shall assign to the vehicle, for display thereon, a special distinguishing mark in the form and 
manner specified by the Central Government and such special permit shall be valid in any other region or 
State without the countersignature of the Regional Transport Authority of the other region or of the State 
Transport Authority of the other State, as the case may be. 
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) but subject to any rules that may be made 
by the Central Government under sub-section (14), any State Transport Authority may, for the purpose of 
promoting tourism, grant permits in respect of tourist vehicles valid for the whole of India, or in such 
contiguous States not being less than three in number including the State in which the permit is issued as 
may be specified in such permit in accordance with the choice indicated in the application and the 
provisions of sections 73, 74, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 862[clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 87 and 
section 89] shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to such permits. 
3*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
        * 
(11) The following shall be conditions of every permit granted under sub-section (9), namely:— 
(i) every motor vehicle in respect of which such permit is granted shall conform to such 
description, requirement regarding the seating capacity, standards of comforts, amenities and other 
matters, as the Central Government may specify in this behalf; 
(ii) every such motor vehicle shall be driven by a person having such qualifications and satisfying 
such conditions as may be specified by the Central Government; and 
(iii) such other conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), but, subject to the rules that may be made 
by the Central Government under sub-section (14), the appropriate authority may, for the purpose of 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 27, for “grant a special permit in relation to a vehicle covered” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid, for “and 89” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Sub-section (10) omitted by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

56 
 
encouraging long distance inter-State road transport, grant in a State, national permits in respect of goods 
carriages and the provisions of sections 69, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 1[clause (d) of  
sub-section (1) of section 87 and section 89] shall, as far as may be, apply to or in relation to the grant of 
national permits. 
2*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
        * 
(14) (a) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the provisions of this section.  
(b) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) the authorisation fee payable for the issue of a permit referred to in sub-sections (9) and (12); 
(ii) the fixation of the laden weight of the motor vehicle; 
(iii) the distinguishing particulars or marks to be carried or exhibited in or on the motor vehicle; 
(iv) the colour or colours in which the motor vehicle is to be painted; 
(v) such other matters as the appropriate authority shall consider in granting a national permit. 
Explanation.—In this section,— 
(a) “appropriate authority”, in relation to a national permit, means the authority which is 
authorised under this Act to grant a goods carriage permit; 
(b) “authorisation fee” means the annual fee, not exceeding one thousand rupees, which may be 
charged by the appropriate authority of a State to enable a motor vehicle, covered by the permit 
referred to in sub-sections (9) and (12) to be used in other States subject to the payment of taxes or 
fees, if any, levied by the States concerned; 
(c) “national permit” means a permit granted by the appropriate authority to goods carriages to 
operate throughout the territory of India or in such contiguous States, not being less than four in 
number, including the State in which the permit is issued as may be specified in such permit in 
accordance with the choice indicated in the application. 
89. Appeals.—(1) Any person— 
(a) aggrieved by the refusal of the State or a Regional Transport Authority to grant a permit, or by 
any condition attached to a permit granted to him, or 
(b) aggrieved by the revocation or suspension of the permit or by any variation of the conditions 
thereof, or 
(c) aggrieved by the refusal to transfer the permit under section 82, or 
(d) aggrieved by the refusal of the State or a Regional Transport Authority to countersign a 
permit, or by any condition attached to such countersignature, or 
(e) aggrieved by the refusal of renewal of a permit, or  
(f) aggrieved by the refusal to grant permission under section 83, or 
(g) aggrieved by any other order which may be prescribed, may, within the prescribed time and in 
the prescribed manner, appeal to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal constituted under  
sub-section (2), who shall, after giving such person and the original authority an opportunity of being 
heard, give a decision thereon which shall be final. 
3[(2) The State Government shall constitute such number of Transport Appellate Tribunals as 
it thinks fit and each such Tribunal shall consist of a judicial officer who is not below the rank of a 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 27, for “and 89” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Sub-section (13) omitted by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for  sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

57 
 
District Judge or who is qualified to be a Judge of the High Court and it shall exercise jurisdiction 
within such area as may be notified by that Government.] 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub- section (2), every appeal pending at 
the commencement of this Act, shall continue to be proceeded with and disposed of as if this Act had not 
been passed. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that when any order is made by the 
State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority in pursuance of a direction issued by the 
Inter-State Transport Commission under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 63A of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939),as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act, and any 
person feels aggrieved by such order on the ground that it is not in consonance with such direction, he 
may appeal under sub-section (1) to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal against such order but not 
against the direction so issued. 
90. Revision.—The State Transport Appellate Tribunal may, on an application made to it, call for the 
record of any case in which an order has been made by a State Transport Authority or Regional Transport 
Authority against which no appeal lies, and if it appears to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal that the 
order made by the State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority is improper or illegal, the 
State Transport Appellate Tribunal may pass such order in relation to the case as it deems fit and every 
such order shall be final: 
Provided that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal shall not entertain any application from a person 
aggrieved by an order of a State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority, unless the 
application is made within thirty days from the date of the order: 
Provided further that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal may entertain the application after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by good and 
sufficient cause from making the application in time: 
Provided also that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal shall not pass an order under this section 
prejudicial to any person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
91. Restriction of hours of work of drivers.—1[(1) The hours of work of any person engaged for 
operating a transport vehicle shall be such as provided in the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27 of 
1961).] 
(2) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, grant such exemptions from the 
provisions of sub-section (1) as it thinks fit, to meet cases of emergency or of delays by reason of 
circumstances which could not be foreseen. 
(3) A State Government or, if authorised in this behalf by the State Government by rules made under 
section 96, the State or a Regional Transport Authority may require persons employing any person whose 
work is subject to any of the provisions of sub-section (1) to fix beforehand the hours of work of such 
persons so as to conform to those provisions, and may provide for the recording of the hours so fixed. 
(4) No person shall work or shall cause or allow any other person to work outside the hours fixed or 
recorded for the work of such persons under sub-section (3). 
(5) A State Government may prescribe the circumstances under which and the period during which 
the driver of a vehicle although not engaged in work is required to remain on or near the vehicle may be 
deemed to be an interval for rest within the meaning of sub-section (1).  
92. Voidance of contracts restrictive of liability.—Any contract for the conveyance of a passenger 
in a stage carriage or contract carriage, in respect of which a permit has been issued under this Chapter, 
shall, so far as it purports to negative or restrict the liability of any person in respect of any claim made 
against that person in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, the passenger while being carried in, 
entering or alighting from the vehicle, or purports to impose any conditions with respect to the 
enforcement of any such liability, be void. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 29, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

58 
 
93. Agent or canvasser to obtain licence.—(1) No person shall engage himself— 
(i) as an agent or a canvasser, in the sale of tickets for travel by public service vehicles or in 
otherwise soliciting custom for such vehicles, or 
(ii) as an agent in the business of collecting, forwarding or distributing goods carried by goods 
carriages,  
unless he has obtained a licence from such authority and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed 
by the State Government. 
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) may include all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the period for which a licence may be granted or renewed; 
(b) the fee payable for the issue or renewal of the licence; 
(c) the deposit of security— 
(i) of a sum not exceeding rupees fifty thousand in the case of an agent in the business of 
collecting, forwarding or distributing goods carried by goods carriages; 
(ii) of a sum not exceeding rupees five thousand in the case of any other agent or canvasser, 
and the circumstances under which the security may be forfeited; 
(d) the provisions by the agent of insurance of goods in transit; 
(e) the authority by which and the circumstances under which the licence may be suspended or 
revoked; 
(f) such other conditions as may be prescribed by the State Government. 
(3) It shall be a condition of every licence that no agent or canvasser to whom the licence is granted 
shall advertise in any newspaper, book, list, classified directory or other publication unless there is 
contained in such advertisement appearing in such newspaper, book, list, classified directory or other 
publication the licence number, the date of expiry of licence and the particulars of the authority which 
granted the licence. 
94. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts.—No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
question relating to the grant of a permit under this Act, and no injunction in respect of any action taken 
or to be taken by the duly constituted authorities under this Act with regard to the grant of a permit, shall 
be entertained by any Civil Court. 
95. Power of State Government to make rules as to stage carriages and contract carriages.—(1) 
A State Government may make rules to regulate, in respect of stage carriages and contract carriages and 
the conduct of passengers in such vehicles. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such rules may— 
(a) authorise the removal from such vehicle of any person contravening the rules by the driver or 
conductor of the vehicle, or, on the request of the driver or conductor, or any passenger, by any police 
officer; 
(b) require a passenger who is reasonably suspected by the driver or conductor of contraventing 
the rules to give his name and address to a police officer or to the driver or conductor on demand; 
(c) require a passenger to declare, if so demanded by the driver or conductor, the journey he 
intends to take or has taken in the vehicle and to pay the fare for the whole of such journey and to 
accept any ticket issued therefor; 
(d) require, on demand being made for the purpose by the driver or conductor or other person 
authorised by the owners of the vehicle, production during the journey and surrender at the end of the 
journey by the holder thereof of any ticket issued to him; 
(e) require a passenger, if so requested by the driver or conductor, to leave the vehicle on the 
completion of the journey the fare for which he has paid; 

59 
 
(f) require the surrender by the holder thereof on the expiry of the period for which it is issued of 
a ticket issued to him; 
(g) require a passenger to abstain from doing anything which is likely to obstruct or interfere with 
the working of the vehicle or to cause damage to any part of the vehicle or its equipment or to cause 
injury or discomfort to any other passenger; 
(h) require a passenger not to smoke in any vehicle on which a notice prohibiting smoking is 
exhibited; 
(i) require the maintenance of complaint books in stage carriages and prescribe the conditions 
under which passengers can record any complaints in the same. 
96. Power of State Government to make rules for the purposes of this Chapter.—(1) A State 
Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules under this section may be made 
with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(i) the period of appointment and the terms of appointment of and the conduct of business by 
Regional and State Transport Authorities and the reports to be furnished by them; 
(ii) the conduct of business by any such authority in the absence of any member (including the 
Chairman) thereof and the nature of business which, the circumstances under which and the manner 
in which, business could be so conducted; 
(iii) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals and the refund of such fees; 
(iv) the forms to be used for the purposes of this Chapter, including the forms of permits; 
(v) the issue of copies of permits in place of permits lost, destroyed or multilated; 
(vi) the documents, plates and marks to be carried by transport vehicles, the manner in which they 
are to be carried and the languages in which any such documents are to be expressed; 
(vii) the fees to be paid in respect of applications for permits,duplicate permits and plates; 
(vii) the exemption of prescribed persons or prescribed classes of persons from payment of all or 
any or any portion of the fees payable under this Chapter; 
(ix) the custody, production and cancellation on revocation or expiration of permits, and the 
return of permits which have been cancelled; 
(x) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a permit granted in another State 
shall be valid in the State without countersignature; 
(xi) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a permit granted in one region shall 
be valid in another region within the State without countersignature; 
(xii) the conditions to be attached to permits for the purpose of giving effect to any agreement 
such as is referred to in clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of section 67; 
(xiii) the authorities to whom, the time within which and the manner in which appeals may be 
made; 
(xiv) the construction and fittings of, and the equipment to be carried by, stage and contract 
carriage, whether generally or in specified areas; 
(xv) the determination of the number of passengers a stage or contract carriage is adapted to carry 
and the number which may be carried; 
(xvi) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried on stage and contract carriages partly 
or wholly in lieu of passengers; 
(xvii) the safe custody and disposal of property left in a stage or contract carriage; 

60 
 
(xviii) regulating the painting or marking of transport vehicles and the display of advertising 
matter thereon, and in particular prohibiting the painting or marking of transport vehicles in such 
colour or manner as to induce any person to believe that the vehicle is used for the transport of mails; 
(xix) the conveyance in stage or contract carriages of corpses or persons suffering from any 
infectious or contagious disease or goods likely to cause discomfort or injury to passengers and the 
inspection and disinfection of such carriage; if used for such purposes; 
(xx) the provision of taxi meters on motor cabs requiring approval or standard types of taxi meters 
to be used and examining testing and sealing taxi meters; 
(xxi) prohibiting the picking up or setting down of passengers by stage or contract carriages at 
specified places or in specified areas or at places other than duly notified stands or halting places and 
requiring the driver of a stage carriage to stop and remain stationary for a reasonable time when so 
required by a passenger desiring to board or alight from the vehicle at a notified halting place; 
(xxii) the requirements which shall be complied with in the construction or use of any duly 
notified stand or halting place, including the provision of adequate equipment and facilities for the 
convenience of all users thereof; the fees, if any, which may be charged for the use of such facilities, 
the records which shall be maintained at such stands or places, the staff to be employed thereat, and 
the duties and conduct of such staff, and generally for maintaining such stands and places in a 
serviceable and clean condition; 
(xxiii) the regulation of motor cab ranks; 
(xxiv) requiring the owners of transport vehicles to notify any change of address or to report the 
failure of or damage to any vehicle used for the conveyance of passengers for hire or reward; 
(xxv) authorising specified persons to enter at all reasonable times and inspect all premises used 
by permit holders for the purposes of their business; 
(xxvi) requiring the person in charge of a stage carriage to carry any person tendering the legal or 
customary fare; 
(xxvii) the conditions under which and the types of containers or vehicles in which animals or 
birds may be carried and the seasons during which animals or birds may or may not be carried; 
(xxviii) the licensing of and the regulation of the conduct of agents or canvassers who engage in 
the sale of tickets for travel by public service vehicles or otherwise solicit custom for such vehicles; 
(xxix) the licensing of agents engaged in the business of collecting for forwarding and distributing 
goods carried by goods carriages; 
(xxx) the inspection of transport vehicles and their contents and of the permits relating to them; 
(xxxi) the carriage of persons other than the driver in goods carriages; 
(xxxii) the records to be maintained and the returns to be furnished by the owners of transport 
vehicles; and 
(xxxiii) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS 
97. Definition.—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “road transport service” 
means a service of motor vehicles carrying passengers or goods or both by road for hire or reward. 
98. Chapter to override Chapter V and other laws.—The provisions of this Chapter and the rules 
and orders made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained 
in Chapter V or in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of 
any such law. 

61 
 
99. Preparation and publication of proposal regarding road transport service of a State 
transport undertaking.—1[(1)]Where any State Government is of opinion that for the purpose of 
providing an efficient, adequate, economical and properly co-ordinated road transport service, it is 
necessary in the public interest that road transport services in general or any particular class of such 
service in relation to any area or route or portion thereof should be run and operated by the State transport 
undertaking, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of other persons or otherwise, the State 
Government may formulate a proposal regarding a scheme giving particulars of the nature of the services 
proposed to be rendered, the area or route proposed to be covered and other relevant particulars respecting 
thereto and shall publish such proposal in the Official Gazette of the State formulating such proposal and 
in not less than one newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or route proposed to be 
covered by such scheme and also in such other manner as the State Government formulating such 
proposal deem fit. 
2[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), when a proposal is published under that 
sub-section, then from the date of publication of such proposal, no permit shall be granted to any person, 
except a temporary permit during the pendency of the proposal and such temporary permit shall be valid 
only for a period of one year from the date of its issue of till the date of final publication of the scheme 
under section 100, whichever is earlier.] 
100. Objection to the proposal.—(1) On the publication of any proposal regarding a scheme in the 
Official Gazette and in not less than one newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or 
route which is to be covered by such proposal any person may, within thirty days from the date of its 
publication in the Official Gazette, file objections to it before the State Government. 
(2) The State Government may, after considering the objections and after giving an opportunity to the 
objector or his representatives and the representatives of the State transport undertaking to be heard in the 
matter, if they so desire, approve or modify such proposal. 
(3) The scheme relating to the proposal as approved or modified under sub-section (2) shall then be 
published in the Official Gazette by the State Government making such scheme and in not less than one 
newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or route covered by such scheme and the same 
shall thereupon become final on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette and shall be called the 
approved scheme and the area or route to which it relates shall be called the notified area or notified 
route: 
Provided that no such scheme which relates to any inter-State route shall be deemed to be an 
approved scheme unless it has the previous approval of the Central Government. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where a scheme is not published as an 
approved scheme under sub-section (3) in the Official Gazette within a period of one year from the date 
of publication of the proposal regarding the scheme in the Official Gazette under sub-section (1), the 
proposal shall be deemed to have lapsed. 
Explanation.—In computing the period of one year referred to in this sub-section, any period or 
periods during which the publication of the approved scheme under sub-section (3) was held up on 
account of any stay or injunction by the order of any court shall be excluded. 
101. Operation of additional services by a State transport undertaking in certain 
circumstances.— Notwithstanding anything contained in section 87, a State transport undertaking may, 
in the public interest operate additional services for the conveyance of the passengers on special occasions 
such as to and from fairs and religious gatherings: 
Provided that the State transport undertaking shall inform about the operation of such additional 
services to the concerned Transport Authority without delay. 
 
 
                                                          
1. Section 99 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act of 54 of 1994, s. 30 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by s. 30, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

62 
 
102. Cancellation or modification of scheme.—(1) The State Government may, at any time, if it 
considers necessary, in the public interest so to do, modify any approved scheme after giving— 
(i) the State transport undertaking; and 
(ii) any other person who, in the opinion of the State Government, is likely to be affected by the 
proposed modification, 
an opportunity of being heard in respect of the proposed modification. 
(2) The State Government shall publish any modification proposed under sub-section (1) in the 
Official Gazette and in one of the newspapers in the regional languages circulating in the area in which it 
is proposed to be covered by such modification, together with the date, not being less than thirty days 
from such publication in the Official Gazette, and the time and place at which any representation received 
in this behalf will be heard by the State Government. 
103. Issue of permits to State transport undertakings.—(1) Where, in pursuance of an approved 
scheme, any State transport undertaking applies in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government in this behalf for a stage carriage permit or a goods carriage permit or a contract carriage 
permit in respect of a notified area or notified route, the State Transport Authority in any case where the 
said area or route lies in more than one region and the Regional Transport Authority in any other case 
shall issue such permit to the State transport undertaking, notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in Chapter V. 
(2) For the purpose of giving effect to the approved scheme in respect of a notified area or notified 
route, the State Transport Authority or, as the case may be, the Regional Transport Authority concerned 
may, by order,— 
(a) refuse to entertain any application for the grant or renewal of any other permit or reject any 
such application as may be pending; 
(b) cancel any existing permit; 
(c) modify the terms of any existing permit so as to— 
(i) render the permit ineffective beyond a specified date; 
(ii) reduce the number of vehicles authorised to be used under the permit; 
(iii) curtail the area or route covered by the permit in so far as such permit relates to the 
notified area or notified route. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no appeal shall lie against any action taken, or 
order passed, by the State Transport Authority or any Regional Transport Authority under sub-section (1) 
or sub-section (2). 
104. Restriction on grant of permits in respect of a notified area or notified route.—Where a 
scheme has been published under sub-section (3) of section 100 in respect of any notified area or notified 
route, the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, shall not 
grant any permit except in accordance with the provisions of the scheme: 
Provided that where no application for a permit has been made by the State transport undertaking in 
respect of any notified area or notified route in pursuance of an approved scheme, the State Transport 
Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, may grant temporary permits to any 
person in respect of such notified area or notified route subject to the condition that such permit shall 
cease to be effective on the issue of a permit to the State transport undertaking in respect of that area or 
route.  
105. Principles and method of determining compensation and payment thereof.—(1) Where, in 
exercise of the powers conferred by clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 103, any existing 
permit is cancelled or the terms thereof are modified, there shall be paid by the State transport 
undertaking to the holder of the permit, compensation, the amount of which shall be determined in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4) or sub-section (5), as the case may be. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no compensation shall be payable on 
account of the cancellation of any existing permit or any modification of the terms thereof, when a permit 

63 
 
for an alternative route or area in lieu thereof has been offered by the State Transport Authority or the 
Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be and accepted by the holder of the permit. 
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no compensation shall be payable on account 
of the refusal to renew a permit under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 103. 
 (4) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (b) or sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 103, any existing permit is cancelled or the terms thereof are 
modified so as to prevent the holder of the permit from using any vehicle authorised to be used thereunder 
for the full period from which the permit, would otherwise have been effective, the compensation 
payableto the holder of the permit for each vehicle affected by such cancellation or modification shall be 
computed as follows:— 
(a) for every complete month or part of a month exceeding 
fifteen days of the unexpired period of the permit 
 
Two hundred rupees;                   
(b) for part of a month not exceeding fifteen days of the 
unexpired period of the permit 
                                            
One hundred rupees: 
Provided that the amount of compensation shall, in no case, be less than four hundred rupees. 
(5) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-clause (iii) of clause (c) of sub-section (2) of 
section 103, the terms of an existing permit are modified so as to curtail the area or route of any vehicle 
authorised to be used thereunder, the compensation payable to the holder of the permit on account of such 
curtailment shall be an amount computed in accordance with the following formula, namely:— 
YA 
R 
 
Explanation.—In this formula,— 
(i) “Y” means the length or area by which the route or area covered by the permit is curtailed; 
(ii) “A” means the amount computed in accordance with sub-section (4); 
(iii) “R” means the total length of the route or the total area covered by the permit. 
(6) The amount of compensation payable under this section shall be paid by the State transport 
undertaking to the person or persons entitled thereto within one month from the date on which the 
cancellation or modification of the permit becomes effective: 
Provided that where the State transport undertaking fails to make the payment within the said period 
of one month, it shall pay interest at the rate of seven per cent. per annum from the date on which it falls 
due. 
106. Disposal of article found in vehicles.—Where any article found in any transport vehicle 
operated by the State transport undertaking is not claimed by its owner within the prescribed period, the 
State transport undertaking may sell the article in the prescribed manner and the sale proceeds thereof, 
after deducting the costs incidental to sale, shall be paid to the owner on demand. 
107. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may make rules for 
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the form in which any proposal regarding a scheme may be published under section 99; 
(b) the manner in which objections may be filed under sub-section (1) of section 100; 
(c) the manner in which objections may be considered and disposed of under sub-section (2) of 
section 100; 
(d) the form in which any approved scheme may be published under sub-section (3) of  
section 100;  

64 
 
(e) the manner in which application under sub-section (1) of section 103 may be made; 
(f) the period within which the owner may claim any article found left in any transport vehicle 
under section 106 and the manner of sale of such article; 
(g) the manner of service of orders under this Chapter; 
(h) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 
108. Certain powers of State Government exercisable by the Central Government.—The powers 
conferred on the State Government under this Chapter shall, in relation to a corporation or company 
owned or controlled by the Central Government or by the Central Government and one or more State 
Governments, be exercisable only by the Central Government in relation to an inter-State route or area. 
CHAPTER VII 
CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
109. General provision regarding construction and maintenance of vehicles.—(1) Every motor 
vehicle shall be so constructed and so maintained as to be at all times under the effective control of the 
person driving the vehicle. 
(2) Every motor vehicle shall be so constructed as to have right hand steering control unless it is 
equipped with a mechanical or electrical signalling device of a prescribed nature. 
1[(3) If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do 
in the public interest, it may by order published in the Official Gazette, notify that any article or 
process used by a manufacturer shall conform to such standard as may be specified in that order.] 
110. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may make rules 
regulating the construction, equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles and trailers with respect to all 
or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the width, height, length and overhang of vehicles and of the loads carried; 
2[(b) the size, nature, maximum retail price and condition of tyres, including embossing thereon 
of date and year of manufacture and the maximum load carrying capacity;] 
(c) brakes and steering gear; 
(d) the use of safety glasses including prohibition of the use of tinted safety glasses; 
(e) signalling appliances, lamps and reflectors; 
(f) speed governors; 
(g) the emission of smoke, visible vapour, sparks, ashes, grit or oil; 
(h) the reduction of noise emitted by or caused by vehicles; 
(i) the embossment of chassis number and engine number and the date of manufacture; 
(j) safety belts, handle bars of motor cycles, auto-dippers and other equipments essential for 
safety of drivers, passengers and other road users; 
(k) standards of the components used in the vehicle as inbuilt safety devices; 
(l) provision for transportation of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life; 
(m) standards for emission of air pollutants; 
3[(n) installation of catalytic convertors in the class of vehicles to be prescribed; 
(o) the placement of audio-visual or radio or tape recorder type of device in public vehicles; 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 31 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for clause (b) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by s. 32, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

65 
 
(p) warranty after sale of vehicle and norms therefor:] 
Provided that any rules relating to the matters dealing with the protection of environment, so far as 
may be, shall be made after consultation with the Ministry of the Government of India dealing with 
environment. 
(2) Rules may be made under sub-section (1) governing the matters mentioned therein, including the 
manner of ensuring the compliance with such matters and the maintenance of motor vehicles in respect of 
such matters, either generally in respect of motor vehicles or trailers or in respect of motor vehicles or 
trailers of a particular class or in particular circumstances. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,— 
(a) the Central Government may exempt any class of motor vehicles from the provisions of this 
Chapter; 
(b) a State Government may exempt any motor vehicle or any class or description of motor 
vehicles from the rules made under sub-section (1) subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government. 
111. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) A State Government may make rules 
regulating the construction, equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles and trailers with respect to all 
matters other than the matters specified in sub-section (1) of section 110. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules may be made under this section 
governing all or any of the following matters either generally in respect of motor vehicles or trailers or in 
respect of motor vehicles or trailers of a particular class or description or in particular circumstances, 
namely:— 
(a) seating arrangements in public service vehicles and the protection of passengers against the 
weather; 
(b) prohibiting or restricting the use of audible signals at certain times or in certain places; 
(c) prohibiting the carrying of appliances likely to cause annoyance or danger; 
(d) the periodical testing and inspection of vehicles by prescribed authorities1[and fees to be 
charged for such test]; 
(e) the particulars other than registration marks to be exhibited by vehicles and the manner in 
which they shall be exhibited; 
(f) the use of trailers with motor vehicles; and 
2* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
     * 
CHAPTER VIII 
CONTROL OF TRAFFIC 
112. Limits of speed.—(1) No person shall drive a motor vehicle or cause or allow a motor vehicle to 
be driven in any public place at a speed exceeding the maximum speed or below the minimum speed 
fixed for the vehicle under this Act or by or under any other law for the time being in force: 
Provided that such maximum speed shall in no case exceed the maximum fixed for any motor vehicle 
or class or description of motor vehicles by the Central Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette. 
(2) The State Government or any authority authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if 
satisfied that it is necessary to restrict the speed of motor vehicles in the interest of public safety or 
convenience or because of the nature of any road or bridge, by notification in the Official Gazette, and by 
causing appropriate traffic signs to be placed or erected under section 116 at suitable places, fix such 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 33 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Clause (g) omitted by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

66 
 
maximum speed limits or minimum speed limits as it thinks fit for motor vehicles or any specified class 
or description of motor vehicles or for motor vehicles to which a trailer is attached, either generally or in a 
particular area or on a particular road or roads: 
Provided that no such notification is necessary if any restriction under this section is to remain in 
force for not more than one month. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any vehicle registered under section 60 while it is being used 
in the execution of military manoeuvres within the area and during the period specified in the notification 
under sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery Practice Act, 1938  
(5 of 1938). 
113. Limits of weight and limitations on use.—(1) The State Government may prescribe the 
conditions for the issue of permits for 1[transport vehicles] by the State or Regional Transport Authorities 
and may prohibit or restrict the use of such vehicles in any area or route. 
(2) Except as may be otherwise prescribed, no person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any 
public place any motor vehicle which is not fitted with pneumatic tyres. 
(3) No person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any public place any motor vehicle or 
trailer— 
(a) the unladen weight of which exceeds the unladen weight specified in the certificate of 
registration of the vehicle, or 
(b) the laden weight of which exceeds the gross vehicle weight specified in the certificate of 
registration. 
(4) Where the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle or trailer driven in contravention of  
sub-section (2) or clause (a) of sub-section (3) is not the owner, a Court may presume that the offence was 
committed with the knowledge of or under the orders of the owner of the motor vehicle or trailer. 
114. Power to have vehicle weighed.—(1) 2[Any officer of the Motor Vehicles Department 
authorized in this behalf by the State Government shall, if he has reason to believe that a goods vehicle or 
trailor is being used in contravention of section 113] require the driver to convey the vehicle to a 
weighing device, if any, within a distance of ten kilometres from any point on the forward route or within 
a distance of twenty kilometres from the destination of the vehicle for weighment; and if on such 
weighment the vehicle is found to contravene in any respect the provisions of section 113 regarding 
weight, he may, by order in writing, direct the driver to off-load the excess weight at his own risk and not 
to remove the vehicle or trailer from that place until the laden weight has been reduced or the vehicle or 
trailer has otherwise been dealt with so that it complies with section 113 and on receipt of such notice, the 
driver shall comply with such directions. 
(2) Where the person authorised under sub-section (1) makes the said order in writing, he shall also 
endorse the relevant details of the overloading on the goods carriage permit and also intimate the fact of 
such endorsement to the authority which issued that permit. 
115. Power to restrict the use of vehicles.—The State Government or any authority authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government, if satisfied that it is necessary in the interest of public safety or 
convenience, or because of the nature of any road or bridge, may by notification in the Official Gazette, 
prohibit or restrict, subject to such exceptions and conditions as may be specified in notification, the 
driving of motor vehicles or of any specified class or description of motor vehicles or the use of trailers 
either generally in a specified area or on a specified road and when any such prohibition or restriction is 
imposed, shall cause appropriate traffic signs to be placed or erected under section 116 at suitable places: 
Provided that where any prohibition or restriction under this section is to remain in force for not more 
than one month, notification thereof in the Official Gazette shall not be necessary, but such local publicity 
as the circumstances may permit, shall be given of such prohibition or restriction. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 34, for “heavy goods vehicles or heavy passenger motor vehicles” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for certain words and figures (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

67 
 
116. Power to erect traffic signs.—(1) (a) The State Government or any authority authorised in this 
behalf by the State Government may cause or permit traffic signs to be placed or erected in any public 
place for the purpose of bringing to public notice any speed limits fixed under sub-section (2) of  
section 112 or any prohibitions or restrictions imposed under section 115 or generally for the purpose of 
regulating motor vehicle traffic. 
(b) A State Government or any authority authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette or by the erection at suitable places of the appropriate traffic sign 
referred to in Part A of the Schedule, designate certain roads as main roads for the purposes of the driving 
regulations made by the Central Government. 
(2) Traffic signs placed or erected under sub-section (1) for any purpose for which provision is made 
in the Schedule shall be of the size, colour and type and shall have the meanings set forth in the Schedule, 
but the State Government or any authority empowered in this behalf by the State Government may make 
or authorise the addition to any sign set forth in the said Schedule, of transcriptions of the words, letters or 
figures thereon in such script as the State Government may think fit, provided that the transcriptions shall 
be of similar size and colour to the words, letters or figures set forth in the Schedule. 
(3) Except as provided by sub-section (1), no traffic sign shall, after the commencement of this Act, 
be placed or erected on or near any road; but all traffic signs placed or erected prior to the commencement 
of this Act by any competent authority shall for the purpose of this Act be deemed to be traffic signs 
placed or erected under the provisions of sub-section (1). 
(4) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, empower any police officer not 
below the rank of a Superintendent of Police to remove or cause to be removed any sign or advertisement 
which is so placed in his opinion as to obscure any traffic sign from view or any sign or advertisement 
which is in his opinion so similar in appearance to a traffic sign as to be misleading or which in his 
opinion is likely to distract the attention or concentration of the driver. 
(5) No person shall wilfully remove, alter, deface, or in any way tamper with, any traffic signs placed 
or erected under this section. 
(6) If any person accidentally causes such damage to a traffic sign as renders it useless for the purpose 
for which it is placed or erected under this section, he shall report the circumstances of the occurrence to a 
police officer or at a police station as soon as possible, and in any case within twenty-four hours of the 
occurrence. 
(7) For the purpose of bringing the signs set forth in 1[the First Schedule] in conformity with any 
International Convention relating to motor traffic to which the Central Government is for the time being a 
party, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make any addition or 
alteration to any such sign and on the issue of any such notification,1[the First Schedule] shall be deemed 
to be amended accordingly. 
117. Parking places and halting stations.—The State Government or any authority authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government may, in consultation with the local authority having jurisdiction in 
the area concerned, determine places at which motor vehicles may stand either indefinitely or for a 
specified period of time, and may determine the places at which public service vehicles may stop for a 
longer time than is necessary for the taking up and setting down of passengers. 
118. Driving regulations.—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make regulations for the driving of motor vehicles. 
119. Duty to obey traffic signs.—(1) Every driver of a motor vehicle shall drive the vehicle in 
conformity with any indication given by mandatory traffic sign and in conformity with the driving 
regulations made by the Central Government, and shall comply with all directions given to him by any 
police officer for the time being engaged in the regulation of traffic in any public place. 
(2) In this section “mandatory traffic sign” means a traffic sign included in Part A of the Schedule, or 
any traffic sign of similar form (that is to say, consisting of or including a circular disc diplaying a device, 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 36, for “the Schedule” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

68 
 
word or figure and having a red ground or border) placed or erected for the purpose of regulating motor 
vehicle traffic under sub-section (1) of section 116. 
120. Vehicles with left hand control.—No person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any 
public place any motor vehicle with a left-hand steering control unless it is equipped with a mechanical or 
electrical signalling device of a prescribed nature and in working order. 
121. Signals and signalling devices.—The driver of a motor vehicle shall make such signals and on 
such occasions as may be prescribed by the Central Government: 
Provided that the signal of an intention to turn to the right or left or to stop— 
(a) in the case of a motor vehicle with a right-hand steering control, may be given by a 
mechanical or electrical device of a prescribed nature affixed to the vehicle; and 
(b) in the case of a motor vehicle with a left hand steering control, shall be given by a mechanical 
or electrical device of a prescribed nature affixed to the vehicle: 
Provided further that the State Government may, having regard to the width and condition of the 
roads in any area or route, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt subject to such conditions as 
may be specified therein any motor vehicle or class or description of motor vehicles from the operation of 
this section for the purpose of plying in that area or route. 
122. Leaving vehicle in dangerous position.—No person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or 
allow the vehicle or any trailer to be abandoned or to remain at rest on any public place in such a position 
or in such a condition or in such circumstances as to cause or likely to cause danger, obstruction or undue 
inconvenience to other users of the public place or to the passengers. 
123. Riding on running board, etc.—(1) No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall 
carry any person or permit any person to be carried on the running board or otherwise than within the 
body of the vehicle. 
(2) No person shall travel on the running board or on the top or on the bonnet of a motor vehicle. 
124. Prohibition against travelling without pass or ticket.—No person shall enter or remain in any 
stage carriage for the purposes of travelling therein unless he has with him a proper pass or ticket: 
Provided that where arrangements for the supply of tickets are made in the stage carriage by which a 
person has to travel, a person may enter such stage carriage but as soon as may be after his entry therein, 
be shall make the payment of his fare to the conductor or the driver who performs the functions of a 
conductor and obtain from such conductor or driver, as the case may be, a ticket for his journey. 
Explanation.—In this section,— 
(a) “pass” means a duty, privilege or courtesy pass entitling the person to whom it is given to 
travel in a stage carriage gratuitously and includes a pass issued on payment for travel in a stage 
carriage for the period specified therein; 
(b) “ticket” includes a single ticket, a return ticket or a season ticket. 
125. Obstruction of driver.—No person driving a motor vehicle shall allow any person to stand or 
sit or to place anything in such a manner or position as to hamper the driver in his control of the vehicle. 
126. Stationary vehicles.—No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or allow the 
vehicle to remain stationary in any public place, unless there is in the driver’s seat a person duly licensed 
to drive the vehicle or unless the mechanism has been stopped and a brake or brakes applied or such other 
measures taken as to ensure that the vehicle cannot accidentally be put in motion in the absence of the 
driver. 
127. Removal of motor vehicles abandoned or left unattended on a public place.—1[(1) Where 
any motor vehicle is abandoned, or left unattended, on a public place for ten hours or more or is parked in 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 37, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

69 
 
a place where parking is legally prohibited, its removal by a towing service or its immobilisations by any 
means including wheel clamping may be authorised by a police officer in uniform having jurisdiction.] 
(2) Where an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burnt or partially dismantled vehicle is creating a 
traffic hazard, because of its position in relation to the 1[public place], or its physical appearance is 
causing the impediment to the traffic, its immediate removal from the1[public place] by a towing service 
may be authorised by a police officer having jurisdiction. 
(3) Where a vehicle is authorised to be removed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by a police 
officer, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing costs, besides any other penalty.  
128. Safety measures for drivers and pillion riders.—(1) No driver of a two-wheeled motor cycle 
shall carry more than one person in addition to himself on the motor cycle and no such person shall be 
carried otherwise than sitting on a proper seat securely fixed to the motor cycle behind the driver’s seat 
with appropriate safety measures. 
(2) In addition to the safety measures mentioned in sub-section (1), the Central Government may, 
prescribe other safety measures for the drivers of two-wheeled motor cycles and pillion riders thereon. 
129. Wearing of protective headgear.—Every person driving or riding (otherwise than in a side car, 
on a motor cycle of any class or description) shall, while in a public place, wear 2[protective headgear 
conforming to the standards of Bureau of Indian Standards]: 
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a person who is a Sikh, if he is, while 
driving or riding on the motor cycle, in a public place, wearing a turban: 
Provided further that the State Government may, by such rules, provide for such exceptions as it may 
think fit. 
Explanation.—”Protective headgear” means a helmet which,— 
(a) by virtue of its shape, material and construction, could reasonably be expected to afford to the 
person driving or riding on a motor cycle a degree of protection from injury in the event of an 
accident; and 
(b) is securely fastened to the head of the wearer by means of straps or other fastenings provided 
on the headgear. 
130. Duty to produce licence and certificate of registration.—(1) The driver of a motor vehicle in 
any public place shall, on demand by any police officer in uniform, produce his licence for examination: 
Provided that the driver may, if his licence has been submitted to, or has been seized by, any officer 
or authority under this or any other Act, produce in lieu of the licence a receipt or other acknowledgment 
issued by such officer or authority in respect thereof and thereafter produce the licence within such 
period, in such manner as the Central Government may prescribe to the police officer making the demand. 
3[(2) The conductor, if any, of a motor vehicle on any public place shall on demand by any officer of 
the Motor Vehicles Department authorised in this behalf, produce the licence for examination.] 
4[(3) The owner of a motor vehicle (other than a vehicle registered under section 60), or in his 
absence the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle, shall, on demand by a registering authority or 
any other officer of the Motor Vehicles Department duly authorised in this behalf, produce the certificate 
of insurance of the vehicle and, where the vehicle is a transport vehicle, also the certificate of fitness 
referred to in section 56 and the permit; and if any or all of the certificates or the permit are not in his 
possession, he shall, within fifteen days from the date of demand, submit photo copies of the same, duly 
attested in person or send the same by registered post to the officer who demanded it. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 37, for “highway” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub-section (3) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

70 
 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, "certificate of insurance" means the certificate 
issued under sub-section (3) of section 147.] 
(4) If the licence referred to in sub-section (2) or the certificates or permit referred to in  
sub-section (3), as the case may be, are not at the time in the possession of the person to whom demand is 
made, it shall be a sufficient compliance with this section if such person produces the licence or 
certificates or permit within such period in such manner as the Central Government may prescribe, to the 
police officer or authority making the demand: 
Provided that, except to such extent and with such modifications as may be prescribed, the provisions 
of this sub-section shall not apply to any person required to produce the certificate of registration or the 
certificate of fitness of a transport vehicle. 
131. Duty of the driver to take certain precautions at unguarded railway level crossing.—Every 
driver of a motor vehicle at the approach of any unguarded railway level crossing shall cause the vehicle 
to stop and the driver of the vehicle shall cause the conductor or cleaner or attendant or any other person 
in the vehicle to walk up to the level crossing and ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either 
side and then pilot the motor vehicle across such level crossing, and where no conductor or cleaner or 
attendant or any other person is available in the vehicle, the driver of the vehicle shall get down from the 
vehicle himself to ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either side before the railway track is 
crossed. 
132. Duty of driver to stop in certain cases.—(1) The driver of a motor vehicle shall cause the 
vehicle to stop and remain stationary so long as 1[may for such reasonable time as may be necessary, but 
not exceeding twenty-four hours]— 
2[(a) when required to do so by any police officer not below the rank of a Sub-Inspector in 
 uniform, in the event of the vehicle being involved in the occurrence of an accident to a  person, 
animal or vehicle or of damage to property, or] 
(b) when required to do so by any person in charge of an animal if such person apprehends that 
the animal is, or being alarmed by the vehicle will become, unmanageable, or 
3* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
       * 
and he shall give his name and address and the name and address of the owner of the vehicle to any 
person affected by any such accident or damage who demands it provided such person also furnishes his 
name and address. 
(2) The driver of a motor vehicle shall, on demand by a person giving his own name and address and 
alleging that the driver has committed an offence punishable under section 184 give his name and address 
to that person. 
(3) In this section the expression “animal” means any horse, cattle, elephant, camel, ass, mule, sheep 
or goat. 
133. Duty of owner of motor vehicle to give information.—The owner of a motor vehicle, the 
driver or conductor of which is accused of any offence under this Act shall, on the demand of any police 
officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government, give all information regarding the name and 
address of, and the licence held by, the driver or conductor which is in his possession or could by 
reasonable diligence be ascertained by him. 
134. Duty of driver in case of accident and injury to a person.—When any person is injured or any 
property of a third party is damaged, as a result of an accident in which a motor vehicle is involved, the 
driver of the vehicle or other person in charge of the vehicle shall— 
(a) unless it is not practicable to do so on account of mob fury or any other reason beyond his 
control, take all reasonable steps to secure medical attention for the injured person, 4[by conveying 
him to the nearest medical practitioner or hospital, and it shall be the duty of every registered medical 
practitioner or the doctor on the duty in the hospital immediately to attend to the injured person and 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 40, for “may reasonably be necessary” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for clause (a) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Clause (c) omitted by s. 40, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
4. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for “and if necessary, convey him to the nearest hospital” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

71 
 
render medical aid or treatment without waiting for any procedural formalities], unless the injured 
person or his guardian, in case he is a minor, desires otherwise; 
(b) give on demand by a police officer any information required by him, or, if no police officer is 
present, report the circumstances of the occurrence, including the circumstances, if any, for not taking 
reasonable steps to secure medical attention as required under clause (a), at the nearest police station 
as soon as possible, and in any case within twenty-four hours of the occurrence. 
1[(c) give the following information in writing to the insurer, who has issued the certificates of 
insurance, about the occurrence of the accident, namely:— 
(i) insurance policy number and period of its validity; 
(ii) date, time and place of accident; 
(iii) particulars of the persons injured or killed in the accident; 
(iv) name of the driver and the particulars of his driving licence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section the expression “driver” includes the owner of the 
vehicle.] 
135. Schemes to be framed for the investigation of accident cases and wayside amenities, etc.—
(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make one or more schemes to 
provide for— 
(a) an in depth study on causes and analysis of motor vehicle accidents; 
(b) wayside amenities on highways; 
(c) traffic aid posts on highways; and 
(d) truck parking complexes along highways. 
(2) Every scheme made under this section by any State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before the State Legislature. 
136. Inspection of vehicle involved in accident.—When any accident occurs in which a motor 
vehicle is involved, any person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, on production if 
so required of his authority, inspect the vehicle and for that purpose may enter at any reasonable time any 
premises where the vehicle may be, and may remove the vehicle for examination: 
Provided that the place to which the vehicle is so removed shall be intimated to the owner of the 
vehicle and the vehicle shall be returned 2[after completion of the formalities to the owner, driver or the 
person in charge of the vehicle within twenty-four hours]. 
137. Power of Central Government to make rules.—The Central Government may make rules to 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the occasions on which signals shall be made by drivers of motor vehicles and such signals 
under section 121; 
(b) the manner in which the licences and certificates may be produced to the police officer under 
section 130. 
138. Power of State Government to make rules.—(1) The State Government may make rules for 
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter other than the matters specified in 
section 137. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the removal and the safe custody of vehicles including their loads which have broken down or 
which have been left standing or have been abandoned on roads; 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 41 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for “without unnecessary delay” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

72 
 
(b) the installation and use of weighing devices; 
(c) the maintenance and management of wayside amenities complexes; 
(d) the exemption from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter of fire brigade vehicles, 
ambulances and other special classes or descriptions of vehicle, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed; 
(e) the maintenance and management of parking places and stands and the fees, if any, which may 
be charged for their use; 
(f) prohibiting the driving downhill of a motor vehicle with the gear disengaged either generally 
or in a specified place; 
(g) prohibiting the taking hold of or mounting of a motor vehicle in motion; 
(h) prohibiting the use of foot-paths or pavements by motor vehicles; 
(i) generally, the prevention of danger, injury or annoyance to the public or any person, or of 
danger or injury to property or of abstruction to traffic; and 
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
CHAPTER IX 
MOTOR VEHICLES TEMPORARILY LEAVING OR VISITING INDIA 
139. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for all or any of the following purposes, namely:— 
(a) the grant and authentication of travelling passes, certificates or authorisations to persons 
temporarily taking motor vehicles out of India to any place outside India or to persons temporarily 
proceeding out of India to any place outside India and desiring to drive a motor vehicle during their 
absence from India; 
(b) prescribing the conditions subject to which motor vehicles brought temporarily into India 
from outside India by persons intending to make a temporary stay in India may be possessed and used 
in India; and 
(c) prescribing the conditions subject to which persons entering India from any place outside 
India for a temporary stay in India may drive motor vehicles in India. 
(2) For the purpose of facilitating and regulating the services of motor vehicles operating between 
India and any other country under any reciprocal arrangement and carrying passengers or goods or both 
by road for hire or reward, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the conditions subject to which motor vehicles carrying on such services may be brought into 
India from outside India and possessed and used in India; 
(b) the conditions subject to which motor vehicles may be taken from any place in India to any 
place outside India; 
(c) the conditions subject to which persons employed as drivers and conductors of such motor 
vehicles may enter or leave India; 
(d) the grant and authentication of travelling passes, certificates or authorisations to persons 
employed as drivers and conductors of such motor vehicles; 
(e) the particulars (other than registration marks) to be exhibited by such motor vehicles and the 
manner in which such particulars are to be exhibited; 
(f) the use of trailers with such motor vehicles; 
(g) the exemption of such motor vehicles and their drivers and conductors from all or any of the 
provisions of this Act [other than those referred to in sub-section (4)] or the rules made thereunder; 

73 
 
(h) the identification of the drivers and conductors of such motor vehicles; 
(i) the replacement of the travelling passes, certificates or authorisations, permits, licences or any 
other prescribed documents lost or defaced, on payment of such fee as may be prescribed; 
(j) the exemption from the provisions of such laws as relate to customs, police or health with a 
view to facilitate such road transport services; 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) No rule made under this section shall operate to confer on any person any immunity in any State 
from the payment of any tax levied in that State on motor vehicles or their users. 
(4) Nothing in this Act or in any rule made thereunder by a State Government relating to:— 
(a) the registration and identification of motor vehicles, or 
(b) the requirements as to construction, maintenance and equipment of motor vehicles, or 
(c) the licensing and the qualifications of drivers and conductors of motor vehicles,  
shall apply— 
(i) to any motor vehicle to which or to any driver of a motor vehicle to whom any rules made 
under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2) apply; or 
(ii) to any conductor of a motor vehicle to whom any rules made under sub-section (2) apply. 
CHAPTER X 
LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT IN CERTAIN CASES 
140. Liability to pay compensation in certain cases on the principle of no fault.—(1) Where death 
or permanent disablement of any person has resulted from an accident arising out of the use of a motor 
vehicle or motor vehicles, the owner of the vehicle shall, or, as the case may be, the owners of the 
vehicles shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay compensation in respect of such death or disablement 
in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2) The amount of compensation which shall be payable under sub-section (1) in respect of the death 
of any person shall be a fixed sum of 1[fifty thousand rupees] and the amount of compensation payable 
under that sub-section in respect of the permanent disablement of any person shall be a fixed sum of 
2[twenty-five thousand rupees]. 
(3) In any claim for compensation under sub-section (1), the claimant shall not be required to plead 
and establish that the death or permanent disablement in respect of which the claim has been made was 
due to any wrongful act, neglect or default of the owner or owners of the vehicle or vehicles concerned or 
of any other person. 
(4) A claim for compensation under sub-section (1) shall not be defeated by reason of any wrongful 
act, neglect or default of the person in respect of whose death or permanent disablement the claim has 
been made nor shall the quantum of compensation recoverable in respect of such death or permanent 
disablement be reduced on the basis of the share of such person in the responsibility for such death or 
permanent disablement. 
3[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) regarding death or bodily injury to any 
person, for which the owner of the vehicle is liable to give compensation for relief, he is also liable to pay 
compensation under any other law for the time being in force: 
Provided that the amount of such compensation to be given under any other law shall be reduced from 
the amount of compensation payable under this section or under section 163A.] 
 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 43, for “twenty-five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 43, ibid., for “twelve thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Ins. by s. 43, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

74 
 
141. Provisions as to other right to claim compensation for death or permanent disablement.—
(1) The right to claim compensation under section 140 in respect of death or permanent disablement of 
any person shall be in addition to 1[any other right, except the right to claim under the scheme referred to 
in section 163A (such other right hereafter] in this section referred to as the right on the principle of fault) 
to claim compensation in respect thereof under any other provision of this Act or of any other law for the 
time being in force. 
(2) A claim for compensation under section 140 in respect of death or permanent disablement of any 
person shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible and where compensation is claimed in respect of 
such death or permanent disablement under section 140 and also in pursuance of any right on the 
principle of fault, the claim for compensation under section 140 shall be disposed of as aforesaid in the 
first place. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where in respect of the death or permanent 
disablement of any person, the person liable to pay compensation under section 140 is also liable to pay 
compensation in accordance with the right on the principle of fault, the person so liable shall pay the  
first-mentioned compensation and— 
(a) if the amount of the first-mentioned compensation is less than the amount of the  
second-mentioned compensation, he shall be liable to pay (in addition to the first-mentioned 
compensation) only so much of the second-mentioned compensation as is equal to the amount by 
which it exceeds the first-mentioned compensation; 
(b) if the amount of the first-mentioned compensation is equal to or more than the amount of the 
second-mentioned compensation, he shall not be liable to pay the second-mentioned compensation. 
142. Permanent disablement.—For the purposes of this Chapter, permanent disablement of a person 
shall be deemed to have resulted from an accident of the nature referred to in sub-section (1) of  
section 140 if such person has suffered by reason of the accident, any injury or injuries involving— 
(a) permanent privation of the sight of either eye or the hearing of either ear, or privation of any 
member or joint; or 
(b) destruction or permanent impairing of the powers of any member or joint; or 
(c) permanent disfiguration of the head or face. 
143. Applicability of Chapter to certain claims under Act 8 of 1923.—The provisions of this 
Chapter shall also apply in relation to any claim for compensation in respect of death or permanent 
disablement of any person under the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 resulting from an accident of 
the nature referred to in sub-section (1) of section 140 and for this purpose, the said provisions shall, with 
necessary modifications, be deemed to form part of that Act. 
144. Overriding effect.—The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other provision of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER XI 
INSURANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS 
145. Definitions.—In this Chapter,— 
(a) “authorised insurer” means an insurer for the time being carrying on general insurance 
business in India under the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972, (57 of 1972) and 
any Government insurance fund authorised to do general insurance business under that Act; 
(b) “certificate of insurance” means a certificate issued by an authorised insurer in pursuance of 
sub-section (3) of section 147 and includes a cover note complying with such requirements as may be 
prescribed, and where more than one certificate has been issued in connection with a policy, or where 
a copy of a certificate has been issued, all those certificates or that copy, as the case may be; 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 44, for “any other right (hereafter” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

75 
 
(c) “liability”, wherever used in relation to the death of or bodily injury to any person, includes 
liability in respect thereof under section 140; 
(d) “policy of insurance” includes “certificate of insurance”; 
(e) “property” includes goods carried in the motor vehicle, roads, bridges, culverts, causeways, 
trees, posts and mile- stones; 
(f) “reciprocating country” means any such country as may on the basis of reciprocity be notified 
by the Central Government in the Official Gazette to be a reciprocating country for the purposes of 
this Chapter; 
(g) “third party” includes the Government. 
146. Necessity for insurance against third party risk.—(1) No person shall use, except as a 
passenger, or cause or allow any other person to use, a motor vehicle in a public place, unless there is in 
force in relation to the use of the vehicle by that person or that other person, as the case may be, a policy 
of insurance complying with the requirements of this Chapter: 
1[Provided that in the case of a vehicle carrying, or meant to carry, dangerous or hazardous goods, 
there shall also be a policy of insurance under the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 (6 of 1991).] 
Explanation.—A person driving a motor vehicle merely as a paid employee, while there is in force in 
relation to the use of the vehicle no such policy as is required by this sub-section, shall not be deemed to 
act in contravention of the sub-section unless he knows or has reason to believe that there is no such 
policy in force. 
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to any vehicle owned by the Central Government or a State 
Government and used for Government purposes unconnected with any commercial enterprise. 
(3) The appropriate Government may, by order, exempt from the operation of sub-section (1) any 
vehicle owned by any of the following authorities, namely:— 
(a) the Central Government or a State Government, if the vehicle is used for Government 
purposes connected with any commercial enterprise;  
(b) any local authority; 
(c) any State transport undertaking: 
Provided that no such order shall be made in relation to any such authority unless a fund has been 
established and is maintained by that authority in accordance with the rules made in that behalf under this 
Act for meeting any liability arising out of the use of any vehicle of that authority which that authority or 
any person in its employment may incur to third parties. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “appropriate Government” means the Central 
Government or a State Government, as the case may be, and— 
(i) in relation to any corporation or company owned by the Central Government or any State 
Government, means the Central Government or that State Government; 
(ii) in relation to any corporation or company owned by the Central Government and one or more 
State Governments, means the Central Government; 
(iii) in relation to any other State transport undertaking or any local authority, means that 
Government which has control over that undertaking or authority. 
147. Requirements of policies and limits of liability.—(1) In order to comply with the requirements 
of this Chapter, a policy of insurance must be a policy which— 
(a) is issued by a person who is an authorised insurer; and 
                                                          
1.Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 45 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

76 
 
(b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent specified in  
sub-section (2)— 
(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of the death of or bodily 
1[injury to any person, including owner of the goods or his authorized representative carried in the 
vehicle]or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of the 
vehicle in a public place; 
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused 
by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public place: 
Provided that a policy shall not be required— 
(i) to cover liability in respect of the death, arising out of and in the course of his employment, of 
the employee of a person insured by the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an 
employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other than a liability arising under the 
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, any 
such employee— 
(a) engaged in driving the vehicle, or 
(b) if it is a public service vehicle engaged as a conductor of the vehicle or in examining 
tickets on the vehicle, or 
(c) if it is a goods carriage, being carried in the vehicle, or 
(ii) to cover any contractual liability. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the death of or bodily injury to 
any person or damage to any property of a third party shall be deemed to have been caused by or to have 
arisen out of, the use of a vehicle in a public place notwithstanding that the person who is dead or injured 
or the property which is damaged was not in a public place at the time of the accident, if the act or 
omission which led to the accident occurred in a public place. 
(2) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (1), a policy of insurance referred to in sub-section (1), shall 
cover any liability incurred in respect of any accident, up to the following limits, namely:— 
(a) save as provided in clause (b), the amount of liability incurred; 
(b) in respect of damage to any property of a third party, a limit of rupees six thousand: 
Provided that any policy of insurance issued with any limited liability and in force, immediately 
before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to be effective for a period of four months after such 
commencement or till the date of expiry of such policy whichever is earlier. 
(3) A policy shall be of no effect for the purposes of this Chapter unless and until there is issued by 
the insurer in favour of the person by whom the policy is effected a certificate of insurance in the 
prescribed form and containing the prescribed particulars of any condition subject to which the policy is 
issued and of any other prescribed matters; and different forms, particulars and matters may be prescribed 
in different cases. 
(4) Where a cover note issued by the insurer under the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made 
thereunder is not followed by a policy of insurance within the prescribed time, the insurer shall, within 
seven days of the expiry of the period of the validity of the cover note, notify the fact to the registering 
authority in whose records the vehicle to which the cover note relates has been registered or to such other 
authority as the State Government may prescribe. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, an insurer issuing a 
policy of insurance under this section shall be liable to indemnify the person or classes of persons 
specified in the policy in respect of any liability which the policy purports to cover in the case of that 
person or those classes of persons. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 46, for “injury to any person” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

77 
 
148. Validity of policies of insurance issued in reciprocating countries.—Where, in pursuance of 
an arrangement between India and any reciprocating country, any motor vehicle registered in the 
reciprocating country operates on any route or within any area common to the two countries and there is 
in force in relation to the use of the vehicle in the reciprocating country, a policy of insurance complying 
with the requirements of the law of insurance in force in that country, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 147 but subject to any rules which may be made under section 164, such policy of 
insurance shall be effective throughout the route or area in respect of which, the arrangement has been 
made, as if the policy of insurance had complied with the requirements of this Chapter. 
149. Duty of insurers to satisfy judgments and awards against persons insured in respect of 
third party risks.—(1) If, after a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub-section (3) of  
section 147 in favour of the person by whom a policy has been effected, judgment or award in respect of 
any such liability as is required to be covered by a policy under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of  
section 147 (being a liability covered by the terms of the policy)1[or under the provisions of section 
163A] is obtained against any person insured by the policy, then, notwithstanding that the insurer may be 
entitled to avoid or cancel or may have avoided or cancelled the policy, the insurer shall, subject to the 
provisions of this section, pay to the person entitled to the benefit of the decree any sum not exceeding the 
sum assured payable thereunder, as if he were the judgment debtor, in respect of the liability, together 
with any amount payable in respect of costs and any sum payable in respect of interest on that sum by 
virtue of any enactment relating to interest on judgments. 
(2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer under sub-section (1) in respect of any judgment or award 
unless, before the commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment or award is given the insurer 
had notice through the Court or, as the case may be, the Claims Tribunal of the bringing of the 
proceedings, or in respect of such judgment or award so long as execution is stayed thereon pending an 
appeal; and an insurer to whom notice of the bringing of any such proceedings is so given shall be entitled 
to be made a party thereto and to defend the action on any of the following grounds, namely:— 
(a) that there has been a breach of a specified condition of the policy, being one of the following 
conditions, namely:— 
(i) a condition excluding the use of the vehicle— 
(a) for hire or reward, where the vehicle is on the date of the contract of insurance a 
vehicle not covered by a permit to ply for hire or reward, or 
(b) for organised racing and speed testing, or 
(c) for a purpose not allowed by the permit under which the vehicle is used, where the 
vehicle is a transport vehicle, or 
(d) without side-car being attached where the vehicle is a motor cycle; or 
(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named person or persons or by any person who is not 
duly licensed, or by any person who has been disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving 
licence during the period of disqualification; or 
(iii) a condition excluding liability for injury caused or contributed to by conditions of war, 
civil war, riot or civil commotion; or 
(b) that the policy is void on the ground that it was obtained by the non-disclosure of a material 
fact or by a representation of fact which was false in some material particular. 
(3) Where any such judgment as is referred to in sub-section (1) is obtained from a Court in a 
reciprocating country and in the case of a foreign judgment is, by virtue of the provisions of section 13 of 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) conclusive as to any matter adjudicated upon by it, the 
insurer (being an insurer registered under the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) and whether or not he is 
registered under the corresponding law of the reciprocating country) shall be liable to the person entitled 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 47 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

78 
 
to the benefit of the decree in the manner and to the extent specified in sub-section (1), as if the judgment 
were given by a Court in India: 
Provided that no sum shall be payable by the insurer in respect of any such judgment unless, before 
the commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment is given, the insurer had notice through the 
Court concerned of the bringing of the proceedings and the insurer to whom notice is so given is entitled 
under the corresponding law of the reciprocating country, to be made a party to the proceedings and to 
defend the action on grounds similar to those specified in sub-section (2). 
(4) Where a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub-section (3) of section 147 to the person 
by whom a policy has been effected, so much of the policy as purports to restrict the insurance of the 
persons insured thereby by reference to any conditions other than those in clause (b) of sub-section (2) 
shall, as respects such liabilities as are required to be covered by a policy under clause (b) of  
sub-section (1) of section 147, be of no effect: 
Provided that any sum paid by the insurer in or towards the discharge of any liability of any person 
which is covered by the policy by virtue only of this sub-section shall be recoverable by the insurer from 
that person. 
(5) If the amount which an insurer becomes liable under this section to pay in respect of a liability 
incurred by a person insured by a policy exceeds the amount for which the insurer would apart from the 
provisions of this section be liable under the policy in respect of that liability, the insurer shall be entitled 
to recover the excess from that person. 
(6) In this section the expressions “material fact” and “material particular” means, respectively a fact 
or particular of such a nature as to influence the judgment of a prudent insurer in determining whether he 
will take the risk and, if so at what premium and on what conditions and the expression “liability covered 
by the terms of the policy” means a liability which is covered by the policy or which would be so covered 
but for the fact that the insurer is entitled to avoid or cancel or has avoided or cancelled the policy. 
(7) No insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) has been given 
shall be entitled to avoid his liability to any person entitled to the benefit of any such judgment or award 
as is referred to in sub-section (1) or in such judgment as is referred to in sub-section (3) otherwise than in 
the manner provided for in sub-section (2) or in the corresponding law of the reciprocating country, as the 
case may be. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, “Claims Tribunal” means a Claims Tribunal 
constituted under section 165 and “award” means an award made by that Tribunal under section 168. 
150. Rights of third parties against insurers on insolvency of the insured.—(1) Where under any 
contract of insurance effected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a person is insured 
against liabilities which he may incur to third parties, then— 
(a) in the event of the person becoming insolvent or making a composition or arrangement with 
his creditors, or 
(b) where the insured person is a company, in the event of a winding up order being made or a 
resolution for a voluntary winding up being passed with respect to the company or of a receiver or 
manager of the company’s business or undertaking being duly appointed, or of possession being taken 
by or on behalf of the holders of any debentures secured by a floating charge of any property 
comprised in or subject to the charge, 
if, either before or after that event, any such liability is incurred by the insured person, his rights against 
the insurer under the contract in respect of the liability shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 
any provision of law, be transferred to and vest in the third party to whom the liability was so incurred. 
(2) Where an order for the administration of the estate of a deceased debtor is made according to the 
law of insolvency, then, if any debt provable in insolvency is owing by the deceased in respect of a 
liability to a third party against which he was insured under a contract of insurance in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter, the deceased debtor’s rights against the insurer in respect of that liability shall, 

79 
 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any provision of law, be transferred to and vest in the person 
to whom the debt is owing. 
(3) Any condition in a policy issued for the purposes of this Chapter purporting either directly or 
indirectly to avoid the policy or to alter the rights of the parties thereunder upon the happening to the 
insured person of any of the events specified in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) or upon the 
making of an order for the administration of the estate of a deceased debtor according to the law of 
insolvency shall be of no effect. 
(4) Upon a transfer under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the insurer shall be under the same 
liability to the third party as he would have been to the insured person, but— 
(a) if the liability of the insurer to the insured person exceeds the liability of the insured person to 
the third party, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights of the insured person against the insurer 
in respect of the excess, and 
(b) if the liability of the insurer to the insured person is less than the liability of the insured person 
to the third party, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights of the third party against the insured 
person in respect of the balance. 
151. Duty to give information as to insurance.—(1) No person against whom a claim is made in 
respect of any liability referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 147 shall on demand by or on 
behalf of the person making the claim refuse to state whether or not he was insured in respect of that 
liability by any policy issued under the provisions of this Chapter, or would have been so insured if the 
insurer had not avoided or cancelled the policy, nor shall he refuse, if he was or would have been so 
insured, to give such particulars with respect to that policy as were specified in the certificate of insurance 
issued in respect thereof. 
(2) In the event of any person becoming insolvent or making a composition or arrangement with his 
creditors or in the event of an order being made for the administration of the estate of a deceased person 
according to the law of insolvency, or in the event of a winding up order being made or a resolution for a 
voluntary winding up being passed with respect to any company or of a receiver or manager of the 
company’s business or undertaking being duly appointed or of possession being taken by or on behalf of 
the holders of any debentures secured by a floating charge on any property comprised in or subject to the 
charge, it shall be the duty of the insolvent debtor, personal representative of the deceased debtor or 
company, as the case may be, or the official assignee or receiver in insolvency, trustee, liquidator, 
receiver or manager, or person in possession of the property to give at the request of any person claiming 
that the insolvent debtor, deceased debtor or company is under such liability to him as is covered by the 
provisions of this Chapter, such information as may reasonably be required by him for the purpose of 
ascertaining whether any rights have been transferred to and vested in him by section 150, and for the 
purpose of enforcing such rights, if any; and any such contract of insurance as purports whether directly 
or indirectly to avoid the contract or to alter the rights of the parties thereunder upon the giving of such 
information in the events aforesaid, or otherwise to prohibit or prevent the giving thereof in the said 
events, shall be of no effect. 
(3) If, from the information given to any person in pursuance of sub-section (2) or otherwise, he has 
reasonable ground for supporting that there have or may have been transferred to him under this Chapter 
rights against any particular insurer, that insurer shall be subject to the same duty as is imposed by the 
said sub-section on the persons therein mentioned. 
(4) The duty to give the information imposed by this section shall include a duty to allow all contracts 
of insurance, receipts for premiums, and other relevant documents in the possession or power of the 
person on whom the duty is so imposed to be inspected and copies thereof to be taken. 
152. Settlement between insurers and insured persons.—(1) No settlement made by an insurer in 
respect of any claim which might be made by a third party in respect of any liability of the nature referred 
to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 147 shall be valid unless such third party is a party to the 
settlement. 

80 
 
(2) Where a person who is insured under a policy issued for the purposes of this Chapter has become 
insolvent, or where, if such insured person is a company, a winding up order has been made or a 
resolutionfor a voluntary winding up has been passed with respect to the company, no agreement made 
between the insurer and the insured person after the liability has been incurred to a third party and after 
the commencement of the insolvency or winding up, as the case may be, nor any waiver, assignment or 
other disposition made by or payment made to the insured person after the commencement aforesaid shall 
be effective to defeat the rights transferred to the third party under this Chapter, but those rights shall be 
the same as if no such agreement, waiver, assignment or disposition or payment has been made. 
153. Saving in respect of sections 150, 151 and 152.—(1) For the purposes of sections 150, 151 and 
152 a reference to “liabilities to third parties” in relation to a person insured under any policy of insurance 
shall not include a reference to any liability of that person in the capacity of insurer under some other 
policy of insurance. 
(2) The provisions of sections 150, 151 and 152 shall not apply where a company is wound up 
voluntarily merely for the purposes of reconstruction or of an amalgamation with another company. 
154. Insolvency of insured persons not to affect liability of insured or claims by third parties.—
Where a certificate of insurance has been issued to the person by whom a policy has been effected, the 
happening in relation to any person insured by the policy of any such event as is mentioned in  
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 150 shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Chapter, not affect any liability of that person of the nature referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of 
section 147; but nothing in this section shall affect any rights against the insurer conferred under the 
provisions of sections 150, 151 and 152 on the person to whom the liability was incurred. 
155. Effect of death on certain causes of action.—Notwithstanding anything contained in  
section 306 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), the death of a person in whose favour a 
certificate of insurance had been issued, if it occurs after the happening of an event which has given rise 
to a claim under the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be a bar to the survival of any cause of action 
arising out of the said event against his estate or against the insurer. 
156. Effect of certificate of insurance.—When an insurer has issued a certificate of insurance in 
respect of a contract of insurance between the insurer and the insured person, then— 
(a) if and so long as the policy described in the certificate has not been issued by the insurer to the 
insured, the insurer shall, as between himself and any other person except the insured, be deemed to 
have issued to the insured to the insured person a policy of insurance conforming in all respects with 
the description and particulars stated in such certificate; and 
(b) if the insurer has issued to the insured the policy described in the certificate, but the actual 
terms of the policy are less favourable to persons claiming under or by virtue of the policy against the 
insurer either directly or through the insured than the particulars of the policy as stated in the 
certificate, the policy shall, as between the insurer and any other person except the insured, be 
deemed to be in terms conforming in all respects with the particulars stated in the said certificate 
157. Transfer of certificate of insurance.—(1) Where a person in whose favour the certificate of 
insurance has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter transfers to another person the 
ownership of the motor vehicle in respect of which such insurance was taken together with the policy of 
insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and the policy described in the certificate shall be 
deemed to have been transferred in favour of the person to whom the motor vehicle is transferred with 
effect from the date of its transfer. 
1[Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that such deemed transfer shall 
include transfer of rights and liabilities of the said certificate of insurance and policy of insurance.] 
(2) The transferee shall apply within fourteen days from the date of transfer in the prescribed form to 
the insurer for making necessary changes in regard to the fact of transfer in the certificate of insurance 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 48 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

81 
 
and the policy described in the certificate in his favour and the insurer shall make the necessary changes 
in the certificate and the policy of insurance in regard to the transfer of insurance. 
158. Production of certain certificates, licence and permit in certain cases.—(1) Any person 
driving a motor vehicle in any public place shall, on being so required by a police officer in uniform 
authorised in this behalf by the State Government, produce— 
(a) the certificate of insurance; 
(b) the certificate of registration; 
(c) the driving licence; and 
(d) in the case of a transport vehicle, also the certificate of fitness referred to in section 56 and the 
permit, relating to the use of the vehicle. 
(2) If, where owing to the presence of a motor vehicle in a public place an accident occurs involving 
death or bodily injury to another person, the driver of the vehicle does not at the time produce the 
certificates, driving licence and permit referred to in sub-section (1) to a police officer, he shall produce 
the said certificates, licence and permit at the police station at which he makes the report required by 
section 134. 
(3) No person shall be liable to conviction under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) by reason only of 
the failure to produce the certificate of insurance if, within seven days from the date on which its 
production was required under sub-section (1), or as the case may be, from the date of occurrence of the 
accident, he produces the certificate at such police station as may have been specified by him to the police 
officer who required its production or, as the case may be, to the police officer at the site of the accident 
or to the officer in charge of the police station at which he reported the accident: 
Provided that except to such extent and with such modifications as may be prescribed, the provisions 
of this sub-section shall not apply to the driver of a transport vehicle. 
(4) The owner of a motor vehicle shall give such information as he may be required by or on behalf of 
a police officer empowered in this behalf by the State Government to give for the purpose of determining 
whether the vehicle was or was not being driven in contravention of section 146 and on any occasion 
when the driver was required under this section to produce his certificate of insurance. 
(5) In this section, the expression “produce his certificate of insurance” means produce for 
examination the relevant certificate of insurance or such other evidence as may be prescribed that the 
vehicle was not being driven in contravention of section 146. 
1[(6) As soon as any information regarding any accident involving death or bodily injury to any 
person is recorded or report under this section is completed by a police officer, the officer incharge of the 
police station shall forward a copy of the same within thirty days from the date of recording of 
information or, as the case may be, on completion of such report to the Claims Tribunal having 
jurisdiction and a copy thereof to the concerned insurer, and where a copy is made available to the owner, 
he shall also within thirty days of receipt of such report, forward the same to such Claims Tribunal and 
Insurer.] 
159. Production of certificate of Insurance on application for authority to use vehicle.—A State 
Government may make rules requiring the owner of any motor vehicle when applying whether by 
payment of a tax or otherwise for authority to use the vehicle in a public place to produce such evidence 
as may be prescribed by those rules to the effect that either— 
(a) on the date when the authority to use the vehicle comes into operation there will be in force 
the necessary policy of insurance in relation to the use of the vehicle by the applicant or by other 
persons on his order or with his permission, or 
(b) the vehicle is a vehicle to which section 146 does not apply. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 49, for sub-section (6) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

82 
 
160. Duty to furnish particulars of vehicle involved in accident.—A registering authority or the 
officer in charge of a police station shall, if so required by a person who alleges that he is entitled to claim 
compensation in respect of an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle, or if so required by an 
insurer against whom a claim has been made in respect of any motor vehicle, furnish to that person or to 
that insurer, as the case may be, on payment of the prescribed fee any information at the disposal of the 
said authority or the said authority or the said police officer relating to the identification marks and other 
particulars of the vehicle and the name and address of the person who was using the vehicle at the time of 
the accident or was injured by it and the property, if any damaged in such form and within such time as 
the Central Government may prescribe. 
161. Special provisions as to compensation in case of hit and run motor accident.—(1) For the 
purposes of this section, section 162 and section 163— 
(a) “grievous hurt” shall have the same meaning as in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
(b) “hit and run motor accident” means an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle or 
motor vehicles the identity whereof cannot be ascertained in spite of reasonable efforts for the 
purpose; 
(c) “scheme” means the scheme framed under section 163. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 
1972 (57 of 1972) or any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having the force of law, 
the General Insurance Corporation of India formed under section 9 of the said Act and the insurance 
companies for the time being carrying on general insurance business in India shall provide for paying in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the scheme, compensation in respect of the death of, or 
grievous hurt to, persons resulting from hit and run motor accidents. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the scheme, there shall be paid as compensation— 
(a) in respect of the death of any person resulting from a hit and run motor accident, a fixed sum 
of 1[twenty-five thousandrupees]; 
(b) in respect of grievous hurt to any person resulting from a hit and run motor accident, a fixed 
sum of 2[twelve thousand and five hundred rupees]. 
(4) The provisions of sub-section (1) of section 166 shall apply for the purpose of making 
applications for compensation under this section as they apply for the purpose of making applications for 
compensation referred to in that sub-section. 
162. Refund in certain cases of compensation paid under section 161.—(1) The payment of 
compensation in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt to, any person under section 161 shall be subject 
to the condition that if any compensation (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the other 
compensation) or other amount in lieu of or by way of satisfaction of a claim for compensation is awarded 
or paid in respect of such death or grievous hurt under any other provision of this Act or any other law or 
otherwise so much of the other compensation or other amount aforesaid as is equal to the compensation 
paid under section 161 shall be refunded to the insurer. 
(2) Before awarding compensation in respect of an accident involving the death of, or bodily injury 
to, any person arising out of the use of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles under any provision of this Act 
(other than section 161) or any other law, the tribunal, court or other authority awarding such 
compensation shall verify as to whether in respect of such death or bodily injury compensation has 
already been paid under section 161 or an application for payment of compensation is pending under that 
section, and such tribunal, court or other authority shall,— 
(a) if compensation has already been paid under section 161, direct the person liable to pay the 
compensation awarded by it to refund to the insurer, so much thereof as is required to be refunded in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (1); 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 50, for “eight thousand and five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 50, ibid., for “two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

83 
 
(b) if an application for payment of compensation is pending under section 161 forward the 
particulars as to the compensation awarded by it to the insurer. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, an application for compensation under section 
161 shall be deemed to be pending— 
(i) if such application has been rejected, till the date of the rejection of the application, and 
(ii) in any other case, till the date of payment of compensation in pursuance of the application. 
163. Scheme for payment of compensation in case of hit and run motor accidents.—(1) The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make a scheme specifying, the manner 
in which the scheme shall be administered by the General Insurance Corporation, the form, manner and 
the time within which applications for compensation may be made, the officers or authorities to whom 
such applications may be made, the procedure to be followed by such officers or authorities for 
considering and passing orders on such applications, and all other matters connected with, or incidental 
to, the administration of the scheme and the payment of compensation. 
(2) A scheme made under sub-section (1) may provide that— 
(a) a contravention of any provision thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for such term 
as may be specified but in no case exceeding three months, or with fine which may extend to such 
amount as may be specified but in no case exceeding five hundred rupees or with both; 
(b) the powers, functions or duties conferred or imposed on any officer or authority by such 
scheme may be delegated with the prior approval in writing of the Central Government, by such 
officer or authority to any other officer or authority; 
(c) any provision of such scheme may operate with retrospective effect from a date not earlier 
than the date of establishment of the Solatium Fund under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939), 
as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act: 
Provided that no such retrospective effect shall be given so as to prejudicially affect the interests 
of any person who may be governed by such provision. 
1[163A. Special provisions as to payment of compensation on structured formula basis.— 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force or 
instrument having the force of law, the owner of the motor vehicle of the authorised insurer shall be liable 
to pay in the case of death or permanent disablement due to accident arising out of the use of motor 
vehicle, compensation, as indicated in the Second Schedule, to the legal heirs or the victim, as the case 
may be. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “permanent disability” shall have the same 
meaning and extent as in the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923). 
(2) In any claim for compensation under sub-section (1), the claimant shall not be required to plead or 
establish that the death or permanent disablement in respect of which the claim has been made was due to 
any wrongful act or neglect or default of the owner of the vehicle or vehicles concerned or of any other 
person. 
(3) The Central Government may, keeping in view the cost of living by notification in the Official 
Gazette, from time to time amend the Second Schedule. 
163B. Option to file claim in certain cases.— Where a person is entitled to claim compensation 
under section 140 and section 163A, he shall file the claim under either of the said sections and not under 
both.] 
164. Power of Central Government to make rules.—(1) The Central Government may make rules 
for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter, other than the matters specified in 
section 159. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 51 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

84 
 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the forms to be used for the purposes of this Chapter; 
(b) the making of applications for and the issue of certificates of insurance; 
(c) the issue of duplicates to replace certificates of insurance lost, destroyed or mutilated; 
(d) the custody, production, cancellation and surrender of certificates of insurance; 
(e) the records to be maintained by insurers of policies of insurance issued under this Chapter; 
(f) the identification by certificates or otherwise of persons or vehicles exempted from the 
provisions of this Chapter; 
(g) the furnishing of information respecting policies of insurance by insurers; 
(h) adopting the provisions of this Chapter to vehicles brought into India by persons making only 
a temporary stay therein or to vehicles registered in a reciprocating country and operating on any 
route or within any area in India by applying those provisions with prescribed modifications; 
(i) the form in which and the time limit within which the particulars referred to in section 160 
may be furnished; and 
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
CHAPTER XII 
CLAIMS TRIBUNALS 
165. Claims Tribunals.—(1) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as Claims 
Tribunal) for such area as may be specified in the notification for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims 
for compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of, or bodily injury to, persons arising out of 
the use of motor vehicles, or damages to any property of a third party so arising, or both. 
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression “claims for 
compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of or bodily injury to persons arising out of the 
use of motor vehicles” includes claims for compensation under section 1401[and section 163A]. 
(2) A Claims Tribunal shall consist of such number of members as the State Government may think 
fit to appoint and where it consists of two or more members, one of them shall be appointed as the 
Chairman thereof. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of a Claims Tribunal unless he— 
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court, or 
(b) is, or has been, a District Judge, or 
(c) is qualified for appointment as a Judge of a High Court1[or as a District Judge]. 
(4) Where two or more Claims Tribunals are constituted for any area, the State Government, may by 
general or special order, regulate the distribution of business among them. 
166. Application for compensation.—(1) An application for compensation arising out of an accident 
of the nature specified in sub-section (1) of section 165 may be made— 
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury; or 
(b) by the owner of the property; or 
(c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any of the legal representatives of the 
deceased; or 
                                                          
1. Added by Act 54 of 1994, s. 52 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

85 
 
(d) by any agent duly authorised by the person injured or all or any of the legal representatives of 
the deceased, as the case may be: 
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined in any such 
application for compensation, the application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the legal 
representatives of the deceased and the legal representatives who have not so joined, shall be impleaded 
as respondents to the application. 
1[(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made, at the option of the claimant, either to the 
Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred or to the Claims 
Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the claimant resides or carries on business or within 
the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant resides, and shall be in such form and contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed: 
Provided that where no claim for compensation under section 140 is made in such application, the 
application shall contain a separate statement to that effect immediately before the signature of the 
applicant.] 
2*  
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
 
           * 
3[(4) The Claims Tribunal shall treat any report of accidents forwarded to it under sub-section (6) of 
section 158 as an application for compensation under this Act.] 
167. Option regarding claims for compensation in certain cases.—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), where the death of, or bodily injury to, 
any person gives rise to a claim for compensation under this Act and also under the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act, 1923, the person entitled to compensation may without prejudice to the provisions of 
Chapter X claim such compensation under either of those Acts but not under both. 
168. Award of the Claims Tribunal.—(1) On receipt of an application for compensation made 
under section 166, the Claims Tribunal shall, after giving notice of the application to the insurer and after 
giving the parties (including the insurer) an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry into the claim or, 
as the case may be, each of the claims and, subject to the provisions of section 162 may make an award 
determining the amount of compensation which appears to it to be just and specifying the person or 
persons to whom compensation shall be paid and in making the award the Claims Tribunal shall specify 
the amount which shall be paid by the insurer or owner or driver of the vehicle involved in the accident or 
by all or any of them, as the case may be: 
Provided that where such application makes a claim for compensation under section 140 in respect of 
the death or permanent disablement of any person, such claim and any other claim (whether made in such 
application or otherwise) for compensation in respect of such death or permanent disablement shall be 
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Chapter X. 
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties concerned 
expeditiously and in any case within a period of fifteen days from the date of the award. 
(3) When an award is made under this section, the person who is required to pay any amount in terms 
of such award shall, within thirty days of the date of announcing the award by the Claims Tribunal, 
deposit the entire amount awarded in such manner as the Claims Tribunal may direct. 
169. Procedure and powers of Claims Tribunals.—(1) In holding any inquiry under section 168, 
the Claims Tribunal may, subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, follow such summary 
procedure as it thinks fit. 
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil Court for the purpose of taking evidence 
on oath and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling the discovery and production of 
documents and material objects and for such other purposes as may be prescribed; and the Claims 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 53, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Sub-section (3) omitted by s. 53, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3. Subs. by s. 53, ibid., for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

86 
 
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the Claims Tribunal may, for the purpose of 
adjudicating upon any claim for compensation, choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge 
of any matter relevant to the inquiry to assist it in holding the inquiry. 
170. Impleading insurer in certain cases.—Where in the course of any inquiry, the Claims Tribunal 
is satisfied that— 
(a) there is collusion between the person making the claim and the person against whom the claim 
is made, or 
(b) the person against whom the claim is made has failed to contest the claim,  
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such 
claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon have, 
without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (2) of section 149, the right to contest the 
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to the person against whom the claim has been made. 
171. Award of interest where any claim is allowed.—Where any Claims Tribunal allows a claim 
for compensation made under this Act, such Tribunal may direct that in addition to the amount of 
compensation simple interest shall also be paid at such rate and from such date not earlier than the date of 
making the claim as it may specify in this behalf. 
172. Award of compensatory costs in certain cases.—(1) Any Claims Tribunal adjudicating upon 
any claim for compensation under this Act, may in any case where it is satisfied for reasons to be 
recorded by it in writing that— 
(a) the policy of insurance is void on the ground that it was obtained by representation of fact 
which was false in any material particular, or 
(b) any party or insurer has put forward a false or vexatious claim or defence, 
such Tribunal may make an order for the payment, by the party who is guilty of mis-representation or by 
whom such claim or defence has been put forward of special costs by way of compensation to the insurer 
or, as the case may be, to the party against whom such claim or defence has been put forward. 
(2) No Claims Tribunal shall pass an order for special costs under sub-section (1) for any amount 
exceeding one thousand rupees. 
(3) No person or insurer against whom an order has been made under this section shall, by reason 
thereof be exempted from any criminal liability in respect of such mis-representation, claim or defence as 
is referred to in sub-section (1). 
(4) Any amount awarded by way of compensation under this section in respect of any mis-
representation, claim or defence, shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages for 
compensation in respect of such mis-representation, claim or defence. 
173. Appeals.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), any person aggrieved by an award of 
a Claims Tribunal may, within ninety days from the date of the award, prefer an appeal to the High Court: 
Provided that no appeal by the person who is required to pay any amount in terms of such award shall 
be entertained by the High Court unless he has deposited with it twenty-five thousand rupees or fifty per 
cent. of the amount so awarded, whichever is less, in the manner directed by the High Court: 
Provided further that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the 
appeal in time. 
(2) No appeal shall lie against any award of a Claims Tribunal if the amount in dispute in the appeal 
is less than ten thousand rupees. 
174. Recovery of money from insurer as arrear of land revenue.—Where any amount is due from 
any person under an award, the Claims Tribunal may, on an application made to it by the person entitled 

87 
 
to the amount, issue a certificate for the amount to the Collector and the Collector shall proceed to recover 
the same in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue. 
175. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts.—Where any Claims Tribunal has been constituted for any 
area, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any question relating to any claim for 
compensation which may be adjudicated upon by the Claims Tribunal for that area, and no injunction in 
respect of any action taken or to be taken by or before the Claims Tribunal in respect of the claim for 
compensation shall be granted by the Civil Court. 
176. Power of State Government to make rules.—A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of sections 165 to 174, and in particular, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the form of application for claims for compensation and the particulars it may contain, and the 
fees, if any, to be paid in respect of such applications; 
(b) the procedure to be followed by a Claims Tribunal in holding an inquiry under this Chapter; 
(c) the powers vested in a Civil Court which may be exercised by a Claims Tribunal; 
(d) the form and the manner in which and the fees (if any) on payment of which an appeal may be 
preferred against an award of a Claims Tribunal; and 
(e) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE 
177. General provision for punishment of offences.—Whoever contravenes any provision of this 
Act or of any rule, regulation or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the 
offence be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, and for any 
second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees. 
178. Penalty for travelling without pass or ticket and for dereliction of duty on the part of 
conductor and refusal to ply contract carriage, etc.—(1) Whoever travels in a stage carriage without 
having a proper pass or ticket with him or being in or having alighted from a stage carriage fails or refuses 
to present for examination or to deliver up his pass or ticket immediately on a requisition being made 
therefor, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
Explanation.—In this section, “pass” and “ticket” have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
section 124. 
(2) If the conductor of a stage carriage, or the driver of a stage carriage performing the functions of a 
conductor in such stage carriage, whose duty is— 
(a) to supply a ticket to a person travelling in a stage carriage on payment of fare by such person, 
either wilfully or negligently,— 
(i) fails or refuses to accept the fare when tendered, or 
(ii) fails or refuses to supply a ticket, or 
(iii) supplies an invalid ticket, or 
(iv) supplies a ticket of a lesser value, or 
(b) to check any pass or ticket, either wilfully or negligently fails or refuses to do so, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(3) If the holder of a permit or the driver of a contract carriage refuses, in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, to ply the contract carriage or to carry the passengers, he 
shall,— 
(a) in the case of two-wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, be punishable with fine which 
may extend to fifty rupees; and 

88 
 
(b) in any other case, be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees. 
179. Disobedience of orders, obstruction and refusal of information.—(1) Whoever wilfully 
disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or authority empowered under this Act to give such 
direction, or obstructs any person or authority in the discharge of any functions which such person or 
authority is required or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is provided for 
the offence be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act to supply any information, wilfully withholds such 
information or gives information which he knows to be false or which he does not believe to be true, 
shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
180. Allowing unauthorised persons to drive vehicles.—Whenever, being the owner or person in 
charge of a motor vehicle, causes, or permits, any other person who does not satisfy the provisions of 
section 3 or section 4 to drive the vehicle shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
181. Driving vehicles in contravention of section 3 or section 4.—Whoever, drives a motor vehicle 
in contravention of section 3 or section 4 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
182. Offences relating to licences.—(1) Whoever, being disqualified under this Act for holding or 
obtaining a driving licence drives a motor vehicle in a public place or in any other place, or applies for or 
obtains a driving licence or, not being entitled to have a driving licence issued to him free of endorsement, 
applies for or obtains a driving licence without disclosing the endorsement made on a driving licence 
previously held by him shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both, and any driving incence so 
obtained by him shall be of no effect. 
(2) Whoever, being disqualified under this Act for holding or obtaining a conductor’s licence, acts as 
a conductor of a stage carriage in a public place or applies for or obtains a conductor’s licence or, not 
being entitled to have a conductor’s licence issued to him free of endorsement, applies for or obtains a 
conductor’s licence without disclosing the endorsements made on a conductor’s licence previously held 
by him, shall be punishable with improsonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both, and any conductor’s licence so obtained by him 
shall be of no effect. 
1[182A. Punishment for offences relating to construction and maintenance of vehicles.—Any 
person who contravenes the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 109, shall be punishable with a fine 
of five thousand rupees for any subsequent offence.] 
183. Driving at excessive speed, etc.—(1) Whoever, drives a motor vehicle in contravention of the 
speed limits referred to in section 112 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to four hundred 
rupees, or, if having been previously convicted of an offence under this sub-section is again convicted of 
an offence under this sub- section, with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
(2) Whoever, causes any person who is employed by him or is subject to his control in driving to 
drive a motor vehicle in contravention of the speed limits referred to in section 112 shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees, or, if having been previously convicted of an offence 
under this sub-section, is again convicted of an offence under this sub-section, with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees. 
(3) No person shall be convicted of an offence punishable under sub-section (1) solely on the 
evidence of one witness to the effect that in the opinion of the witness such person was driving at a speed 
which was unlawful, unless that opinion is shown to be based on an estimate obtained by the use of some 
mechanical device. 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 54 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994).  

89 
 
(4) The publication of a time table under which, or the giving of any direction that, any journey or 
part of a journey is to be completed within a specified time shall, if in the opinion of the Court it is not 
practicable in the circumstances of the case for that journey or part of a journey to be completed in the 
specified time without contravening the speed limits referred to in section 112 be prima facie evidence 
that the person who published the time table or gave the direction has committed an offence punishable 
under sub- section (2). 
184. Driving dangerously.—Whoever, drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner which is 
dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances of case including the nature, condition and 
use of the place where the vehicle is driven and the amount of traffic which actually is at the time or 
which might reasonably be expected to be in the place, shall be punishable for the first offence with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, and for any second or subsequent offence if committed within three years of the commission of a 
previous similar offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
185. Driving by a drunken person or by a person under the influence of drugs.—Whoever, while 
driving, or attempting to drive, a motor vehicle,— 
1[(a) has, in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30 mg. per 100 ml. of blood detected in a test by a 
breath analyser, or] 
(b) is under the influence of a drug to such an extent as to be incapable of exercising proper 
control over the vehicle. 
shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both; and for a second or subsequent offence, 
if committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar offence, with imprisonment for 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with 
both. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the drug or drugs specified by the Central 
Government in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, shall be deemed to render a person 
incapable of exercising proper control over a motor vehicle. 
186. Driving when mentally or phycically unfit to drive.—Whoever drives a motor vehicle in any 
public place when he is to his knowledge suffering from any disease or disability calculated to cause his 
driving of the vehicle to be a source of danger to the public, shall be punishable for the first offence with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees and for a second or subsequent offence with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees. 
187. Punishment for offences relating to accident.—Whoever fails to comply with the provisions 
of clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 132 or section 133 or section 134 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or with both or, if having been previously convicted of an offence under this section, he 
is again convicted of an offence under this section, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
188. Punishment for abetment of certain offences.—Whoever abets the commission of an offence 
under section 184, section 185 or section 186 shall be punishable with the punishment provided for the 
offence. 
189. Racing and trails of speed.—Whoever without the written consent of the State Government 
permits or takes part in a race or trial of speed of any kind between motor vehicles in any public place 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
190. Using vehicle in unsafe condition.—(1) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven 
in any public place a motor vehicle or trailer while the vehicle or trailer has any defect, which such person 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 55, for clause (a) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

90 
 
knows of or could have discovered by the exercise of ordinary care and which is calculated to render the 
driving of the vehicle a source of danger to persons and vehicles using such place, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees or, if as a result of such defect an accident is 
caused causing bodily injury or damage to property, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle, 
which violates the standards prescribed in relation to road safety, control of noise and air- pollution, shall 
be punishable for the first offence with a fine of one thousand rupees and for any second or subsequent 
offence with a fine of two thousand rupees. 
(3) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle which 
violates the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder relating to the carriage of goods which are 
of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life, shall be punishable for the first offence which may 
extend to three thousand rupees, or withimprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with 
both, and for any second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with both. 
191. Sale of vehicle in or alteration of vehicle to condition contravening this Act.—Whoever 
being an importer of or dealer in motor vehicles, sells or delivers or offers to sell or deliver a motor 
vehicle or traller in such condition that the use thereof in a public place would be in contravention of 
Chapter VII or any rule made thereunder or alters the motor vehicle or trailer so as to render its condition 
such that its use in a public place would be in contravention of Chapter VII or any rule made thereunder 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees: 
Provided that no person shall be convicted under this section if he proves that he had reasonable cause 
to believe that the vehicle would not be used in a public place until it had been put into a condition in 
which it might lawfully be so used. 
1[192. Using vehicle without registration.—(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows 
a motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of section 39 shall be punishable for the first 
offence with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand 
rupees for a second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both: 
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a motor vehicle in an emergency for the 
conveyance of persons suffering from sickness or injuries or for the transport of food or materials to 
relieve distress or of medical supplies for a like purpose: 
Provided that the person using the vehicle reports about the same to the Regional Transport Authority 
within seven days from the date of such use. 
(3) The court to which an appeal lies from any conviction in respect of an offence of the nature 
specified in sub-section (1), may set aside or vary any order made by the court below, notwithstanding 
that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such order was made. 
192A. Using vehicle without permit—(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a 
motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 66 or in 
contravention of any condition of a permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the 
purpose for which the vehicle may be used, shall be punishable for the first offence with a fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand rupees and for any subsequent 
offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less than three months or with 
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both: 
Provided that the court may for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment. 
                                                          
1.Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 55, for section 192 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

91 
 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a motor vehicle in an emergency for the 
conveyance of persons suffering from sickness or injury or for the transport of materials for repair or for 
the transport of food or materials to relieve distress or of medical supplies for a like purpose: 
Provided that the person using the vehicle reports about the same to the Regional Transport Authority 
within seven days from the date of such use. 
(3) The court to which an appeal lies from any conviction in respect of an offence of the nature 
specified in sub-section (1), may set aside or vary any order made by the court below, notwithstanding 
that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such order was made.] 
193. Punishment of agents and canvassers without proper authority.—Whoever engages himself 
as an agent or canvasser in contravention of the provisions of section 93 or of any rules made thereunder 
shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and for any 
second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both. 
194. Driving vehicle exceeding permissible weight.—1[(1) Whoever drivers a motor vehicle or 
causes or allows a motor vehicle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 113 or section 
114 or section 115 shall be punishable with minimum fine of two thousand rupees and an additional 
amount of one thousand rupees per tonne of excess load, together with the liability to pay charges for  
off-loading of the excess load.] 
(2) Any driver of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit his vehicle to weighing after being 
directed to do so by an officer authorised in this behalf under section 114 or removes or causes the 
removal of the load or part of it prior to weighing shall be punishable with fine which may extend to three 
thousand rupees. 
195. Imposition of minimum fine under certain circumstances.—(1) Whoever having been 
convicted of an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder commits a similar offence on a 
second or subsequent occasion within three years of the commission of the previous offence, no court 
shall, except for reasons to be recorded by it in writing, impose on him a fine of less than one-fourth of 
the maximum amount of the fine impossible for such offence. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be construed as restricting the power of the court from awarding 
such imprisonment as it considers necessary in the circumstances of the case not exceeding the maximum 
specified in this Act in respect of that offence. 
196. Driving uninsured vehicle.—Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor 
vehicle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 146 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, 
or with both. 
197. Taking vehicle without authority.—(1) Whoever takes and drives away any motor vehicle 
without having either the consent of the owner thereof or other lawful authority shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, 
or with both. 
Provided that no person shall be convicted under this section if the Court is satisfied that such person 
acted in the reasonable belief that he had lawful authority or in the reasonable belief that the owner would 
in the circumstances of the case have given his consent if he had been asked therefor. 
(2) Whoever, unlawfully by force or threat of force or by any other form of intimidation, seizes or 
exercises control of a motor vehicle, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 
(3) Whoever attempts to commit any of the acts referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) in 
relation to any motor vehicle, or abets the commission of any such act, shall also be deemed to have 
committed an offence under sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, sub-section (2). 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 57, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

92 
 
198. Unauthorised interference with vehicle.—Whoever otherwise than with lawful authority or 
reasonable execuse enters or mounts any stationary motor vehicle or tampers with the brake or any part of 
the mechanism of a motor vehicle shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees. 
199. Offences by companies.—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
200. Composition of certain offences.—(1) Any offence whether committed before or after the 
commencement of this Act punishable under section 177, section 178, section 179, section 180, section 
181, section 182, sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 183, section 184, section 186,1[section 189, 
sub-section (2) of section190]; section 191, section 192, section 194, section 196 or section 198 may 
either before or after the institution of the prosecution, be compounded by such officers or authorities and 
for such amount as the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf. 
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (1), the offender, if in custody, shall be 
discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence. 
201. Penalty for causing obstruction to free flow of traffic.—(1) Whoever keeps a disabled vehicle 
on any public place, in such a manner, so as to cause impediment to the free flow of traffic, shall be liable 
for penalty up to fifty rupees per hour, so long as it remains in that position: 
Provided that the vehicle involved in accidents shall be liable for penalty only from the time of 
completion of inspection formalities under the law. 
2[Provided further that where the vehicle is removed by a Government agency, towing charges shall 
be recovered from the vehicle owner or person in-charge of such vehicle.] 
3[(2) Penalties or towing charges under this section shall be recovered by such officer or authority as 
the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise.] 
202. Power to arrest without warrant.—(1) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant 
any person who in his presence commits an offence punishable under section 184 or section 185 or 
section 197: 
Provided that any person so arrested in connection with an offence punishable under section 185 
shall, within two hours of his arrest, be subjected to a medical examination referred to in sections 203 and 
204 by a registered medical practitioner failing which he shall be released from custody. 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 58, for “section 189” (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Ins. by s. 59, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
3.Subs. by s. 59, ibid., for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

93 
 
1[(2) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant any person, who has committed an 
offence under this Act, if such person refuses to give his name and address.] 
(3) A police officer arresting without warrant the driver of a motor vehicle shall if the circumstances 
so require take or cause to be taken any steps he may consider proper for the temporary disposal of the 
vehicle. 
203. Breath tests.—2[(1) A police officer in uniform or an officer of the Motor Vehicles Department, 
as may be authorised in this behalf by that Department, may require any person driving or attempting to 
drive a motor vehicle in a public place to provide one or more specimens of breath for breath test there or 
nearby, if such police officer or officer has any reasonable cause to suspect him of having committed an 
offence under section 185: 
Provided that requirement for breath test shall be made (unless, it is made) as soon as reasonably 
practicable after the commission of such offence.] 
(2) If a motor vehicle is involved in an accident in a public place and a police officer in uniform has 
any reasonable cause to suspect that the person who was driving the motor vehicle at the time of the 
accident, had alcohol in his blood or that he was driving under the influence of a drug referred to in 
section 185 he may require the person so driving the motor vehicle, to provide a specimen of his breath 
for a breath test:— 
(a) in the case of a person who is at a hospital as an indoor patient, at the hospital, 
(b) in the case of any other person, either at or near the place where the requirement is made, or, 
if the police officer thinks fit, at a police station specified by the police officer: 
Provided that a person shall not be required to provide such a specimen while at a hospital as an 
indoor patient if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case is not first notified of 
the proposal to make the requirement or objects to the provision of a specimen on the ground that its 
provision or the requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper care or treatment of the 
patient. 
(3) If it appears to a police officer in uniform, in consequence of a breath test carried out by him on 
any person under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), that the device by means of which the test has been 
carried out indicates the presence of alcohol in the person’s blood, the police officer may arrest that 
person without warrant except while that person is at a hospital as an indoor patient. 
(4) If a person, required by a police officer under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) to provide a 
specimen of breath for a breath test, refuses or fails to do so and the police officer has reasonable cause to 
suspect him of having alcohol in his blood, the police officer may arrest him without warrant except while 
he is at a hospital as an indoor patient. 
(5) A person arrested under this section shall while at a police station, be given an opportunityto 
provide a specimen of breath for a breath test there. 
(6) The results of a breath test made in pursuance of the provisions of this section shall be admissible 
in evidence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “breath test”, means a test for the purpose of 
obtaining an indication of the presence of alcohol in a person’s blood carried out, on one or more 
specimens of breath provided by that person, by means of a device of a type approved by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of such a test. 
204. Laboratory test.—(1) A person, who has been arrested under section 203 may, while at a police 
station, be required by a police officer to provide to such registered medical practitioner as may be 
produced by such police officer, a specimen of his blood for a Laboratory test,— 
(a) it appears to the police officer that the device, by means of which breath test was taken in 
relation to such person, indicates the presence of alcohol in the blood of such person, or 
                                                          
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 60, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
2. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

94 
 
(b) such person, when given the opportunity to submit to a breath test, has refused, omitted or 
failed to do so: 
Provided that where the person required to provide such specimen is a female and the registered 
medical practitioner produced by such police officer is a male medical practitioner, the specimen shall be 
taken only in the presence of a female, whether a medical practitioner or not. 
(2) A person while at a hospital as an indoor patient may be required by a police officer to provide at 
the hospital a specimen of his blood for a laboratory test:— 
(a) if it appears to the police officer that the device by means of which test is carried out in 
relation to the breath of such person indicates the presence of alcohol in the blood of such person, or 
(b) if the person having been required, whether at the hospital or elsewhere, to provide a 
specimen of breath for a breath test, has refused, omitted or failed to do so and a police officer has 
reasonable cause to suspect him of having alcohol in his blood: 
Provided that a person shall not be required to provide a specimen of his blood for a laboratory test 
under this sub-section if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case is not first 
notified of the proposal to make the requirement or objects to the provision of such specimen on the 
ground that its provision or the requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper care or 
treatment of the patient. 
(3) The results of a laboratory test made in pursuance of this section shall be admissible in evidence. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “laboratory test” means the analysis of a specimen of 
blood made at a laboratory established, maintained or recognised by the Central Government or a State 
Government. 
205. Presumption of unfitness to drive.—In any proceeding for an offence punishable under section 
185 if it is proved that the accused, when requested by a police officer at any time so to do, had refused, 
omitted or failed to consent to the taking of or providing a specimen of his breath for a breath test or a 
specimen of his blood for a laboratory test, his refusal, omission or failure may, unless reasonable cause 
therefor is shown, be presumed to be a circumstance supporting any evidence given on behalf of the 
prosecution, or rebutting any evidence given on behalf of the defence, with respect to his condition at that 
time. 
206. Power of police officer to impound document.—(1) Any police officer or other person 
authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he has reason to believe that any identification 
mark carried on a motor vehicle or any licence, permit, certificate of registration, certificate of insurance 
or other document produced to him by the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle is a false 
document within the meaning of section 464 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), seize the mark or 
document and call upon the driver or owner of the vehicle to account for his possession of or the presence 
in the vehicle of such mark or document. 
(2) Any police officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he 
has reason to believe that the driver of amotor vehicle who is charged with any offence under this Act 
may abscond or otherwise avoid the service of a summons, seize any licence held by such driver and 
forward it to the Court taking cognizance of the offence and the said Court shall on the first appearance of 
such driver before it, return the licence to him in exchange for the temporary acknowledgment given 
under sub-section (3). 
(3) A police officer or other person seizing a licence under sub-section (2) shall give to the person 
surrendering the licence a temporary acknowledgment therefor and such acknowledgment shall authorise 
the holder to drive until the licence has been returned to him or until such date as may be specified by the 
police officer or other person in the acknowledgment, whichever is earlier: 
Provided that if any magistrate, police officer or other person authorised by the State Government in 
this behalf is, on an application made to him, satisfied that the licence cannot be, or has not been, returned 

95 
 
to the holder thereof before the date specified in the acknowledgment for any reason for which the holder 
is not responsible, the magistrate, police officer or other person, as the case may be, may extend the 
period of authorization to drive to such date as may be specified in the acknowledgment. 
207. Power to detain vehicles used without certificate of registration permit, etc.—(1) Any police 
officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he has reason to believe 
that a motor vehicle has been or is being used in contravention of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 
or section 39 or without the permit required by sub-section (1) of section 66 or in contravention of any 
condition of such permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the purpose for which the 
vehicle may be used, seize and detain the vehicle, in the prescribed manner and for this purpose take or 
cause to be taken any steps he may consider proper for the temporary safe custody of the vehicle: 
Provided that where any such officer or person has reason to believe that a motor vehicle has been or 
is being used in contravention of section 3 or section 4 or without the permit required by sub-section (1) 
of section 66 he may, instead of seizing the vehicle, seize the certificate of registration of the vehicle and 
shall issue an acknowledgment in respect thereof. 
(2) Where a motor vehicle has been seized and detained under sub-section (1), the owner or person in 
charge of the motor vehicle may apply to the transport authority or any officer authorised in this behalf by 
the State Government together with the relevant documents for the release of the vehicle and such 
authority or officer may, after verification of such documents, by order release the vehicle subject to such 
conditions as the authority or officer may deem fit to impose. 
208. Summary disposal of cases.—(1) The Court taking cognizance of any offence (other than an 
offence which the Central Government may by rules specify in this behalf) under this Act,— 
(i) may, if the offence is an offence punishable with imprisonment under this Act; and 
(ii) shall, in any other case,  
state upon the summons to be served on the accused person that he— 
(a) may appear by pleader or in person; or 
(b) may, by a specified date prior to the hearing of the charge, plead guilty to the charge and remit 
to the Court, by money order, such sum (not exceeding the maximum fine that may be imposed for 
the offence) as the Court may specify, and the plea of guilt indicated in the money order coupon 
itself: 
Provided that the Court shall, in the case of any of the offences referred to in sub-section (2), state 
upon the summons that the accused person, if he pleads guilty, shall so plead in the manner specified in 
clause (b) and shall forward his driving licence to the Court with his letter containing such plea. 
(2) Where the offence dealt with in accordance with sub-section (1) is an offence specified by the 
Central Government by rules for the purposes of this sub-section, the Court shall, if the accused person 
pleads guilty to the charge and forward his driving licence to the Court with the letter containing his plea, 
make an endorsement of such conviction on his driving licence. 
(3) Where an accused person pleads guilty and remits the sum specified and has complied with the 
provisions of sub-section (1), or as the case may be, sub-sections (1) and (2), no further proceedings in 
respect of the offence shall be taken against him nor shall he be liable, notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in this Act, to be disqualified for holding or obtaining a licence by reason of his having 
pleaded guilty. 
209. Restriction on conviction.—No person prosecuted for an offence punishable under section 183 
or section 184 shall be convicted unless— 
(a) he was warned at the time the offence was committed that the question of prosecuting him 
would be taken into consideration, or 
(b) within fourteen days from the commission of the offence, a notice specifying the nature of the 
offence and the time and place where it is alleged to have been committed was served on or sent by 

96 
 
registered post to him or the person registered as the owner of the vehicle at the time of the 
commission of the offence, or 
(c) within twenty-eight days of the commission of the offence, a summons for the offence was 
served on him: 
Provided that nothing, in this section shall apply where the Court is satisfied that— 
(a) the failure to serve the notice or summons referred to in this sub-section was due to the fact 
that neither the name and address of the accused nor the name and address of the registered owner of 
the vehicle could with reasonable diligence have been ascertained in time, or 
(b) such failure was brought about by the conduct of the accused. 
210. Courts to send intimation about conviction.—Every Court by which any person holding a 
driving licence is convicted of an offence under this Act or of an offence in the commission of which a 
motor vehicle was used, shall send intimation to— 
(a) the licensing authority which issued the driving licence, and 
(b) the licensing authority by whom the licence was last renewed,  
and every such intimation shall state the name and address of the holder of the licence, the licence 
number, the date of issue and renewal of the same, the nature of the offence, the punishment awarded for 
the same and such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 
211. Power to levy fee.—Any rule which the Central Government or the State Government is 
empowered to make under this Act may, notwithstanding the absence of any express provision to that 
effect, provide for the levy of such fees in respect of applications, amendment of documents, issue of 
certificates, licences, permits, tests, endorsements, badges, plates, countersignatures, authorisation, supply 
of statistics or copies of documents or orders and for any other purpose or matter involving the rendering 
of any service by the officers or authorities under this Act or any rule made thereunder as may be 
considered necessary: 
Provided that the Government may, if it considers necessary so to do, in the public interest, by 
general or special order, exempt any class of persons from the payment of any such fee either in part or in 
full. 
212. Publication, commencement and laying of rules and notifications.—(1) The power to make 
rules under this Act is subject to the condition of the rules being made after previous publication. 
(2) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall unless some 
later date is appointed, come into force on the date of such publication. 
(3) Every rule made by any State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made before 
the State Legislature. 
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act, every scheme made by the Central 
Government under sub-section (1) of section 75 and sub-section (1) of section 163 and every notification 
issued by the Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 41, sub-section (1) of section 58, 
sub-section (1) of section 59, the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 112, 1[sub-section (4) of  
section 163A]and sub-section (4) of section 213 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, scheme or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or scheme should not be made or the 
notification should not be issued, the rule, scheme or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 62 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

97 
 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule, scheme 
or notification. 
213. Appointment of motor vehicles officers.—(1) The State Government may, for the purpose of 
carrying into effect the provisions of this Act, establish a Motor Vehicles Department and appoint as 
officers thereof such persons as it thinks fit. 
(2) Every such officer shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860). 
(3) The State Government may make rules to regulate the discharge by officers of the Motor Vehicles 
Department of their functions and in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power to prescribe the uniform to be worn by them, the authorities to which they shall be subordinate, the 
duties to be performed by them, the powers (including the powers exercisable by police officers under 
this Act) to be exercised by them, and the conditions governing the exercise of such powers. 
(4) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of the Act, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, prescribe the minimum qualifications which the said officers or any class thereof shall 
possess for being appointed as such. 
(5) In addition to the powers that may be conferred on any officer of the Motor Vehicles Department 
under sub-section (3), such officer as may be empowered by the State Government in this behalf shall 
also have the power to,— 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder are being observed; 
(b) with such assistance, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and search any premises which is in 
the occupation of a person who, he has reason to believe, has committed an offence under this Act or 
in which a motor vehicle in respect of which such offence has been committed is kept: 
Provided that,— 
(i) any such search without a warrant shall be made only by an officer of the rank of a 
gazetted officer; 
(ii) where the offence is punishable with fine only the search shall not be made after sunset 
and before sunrise; 
(iii) where the search is made without a warrant, the gazetted officer concerned shall record 
in writing the grounds for not obtaining a warrant and report to his immediate superior that such 
search has been made; 
(c) examine any person and require the production of any register or other document maintained 
in pursuance of this Act, and take on the spot or otherwise statements of any person which he may 
consider necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act; 
(d) seize or take copies of any registers or documents or portions thereof as he may consider 
relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been committed;  
(e) launch prosecutions in respect of any offence under this Act and to take a bond for ensuring 
the attendance of the offender before any court; 
(f) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub-section to answer any question or make 
any statement tending to incriminate himself. 
(6) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall, so far as may be apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure under the authority of 
any warrant issued under section 94 of that Code. 
214. Effect of appeal and revision on orders passed by original authority.—(1) Where an appeal 
has been preferred or an application for revision has been made against any order passed by an original 

98 
 
authority under this Act, the appeal or the application for revision shall not operate as a stay of the order 
passed by the original authority and such order shall remain in force pending the disposal of the appeal or 
the application for revision, as the case may be, unless the prescribed appellate authority or revisional 
authority otherwise directs. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if an application made by a person for the 
renewal of permit has been rejected by the original authority and such person has preferred an appeal or 
made an application for revision under this Act against such rejection, the appellate authority or, as the 
case may be, the revisional authority may by order direct that the permit shall, notwithstanding the 
expiration of the term specified therein, continue to be valid until the appeal or application for revision is 
disposed of. 
(3) No order made by a competent authority under this Act shall be reversed or altered on appeal or 
revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in the proceedings, unless it appears to the 
prescribed appellate authority or revisional authority, as the case may be, that such error, omission or 
irregularity has, in fact, occasioned a failure of justice. 
215. Road Safety Councils and Committees.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, constitute for the country a National Road Safety Council consisting of a Chairman 
and such other members as that Government considers necessary and on such terms and conditions as that 
Government may determine. 
(2) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the State a State 
Road Safety Council consisting of a Chairman and such other members as that Government considers 
necessary and on such terms and conditions as that Government may determine. 
(3) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute District Road Safety 
Committee for each district in the State consisting of a Chairman and such other members as that 
Government considers necessary and on such terms and conditions as that Government may determine. 
(4) The Councils and Committees referred to in this section shall discharge such functions relating to 
the road safety programmes as the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, 
may, having regard to the objects of the Act, specify. 
216. Power to remove difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date of 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
217. Repeal and savings.—(1) The Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939) and any law corresponding 
to that Act in force in any State immediately before the commencement of this Act in that State (hereafter 
in this section referred to as the repealed enactments) are hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by sub-section (1) of the repealed enactments,— 
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, order or notice issued, or any appointment or declaration 
made, or exemption granted, or any confiscation made, or any penalty or fine imposed, any forfeiture, 
cancellation or any other thing done, or any other action taken under the repealed enactments, and in 
force immediately before such commencement shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been issued, made, granted, done or taken under the 
corresponding provision of this Act; 
(b) any certificate of fitness or registration or licence or permit issued or granted under the 
repealed enactments shall continue to have effect after such commencement under the same 
conditions and for the same period as if this Act had not been passed; 

99 
 
(c) any document referring to any of the repealed enactments or the provisions thereof, shall be 
construed as referring to this Act or to the corresponding provision of this Act; 
(d) the assignment of distinguishing marks by the registering authority and the manner of display 
on motor vehicles in accordance with the provision of the repealed enactments shall, after the 
commencement of this Act, continue to remain in force until a notification under sub-section (6) of 
section 41 of this Act is issued; 
(e) any scheme made under section 68C of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939) or under the 
corresponding law, if any, in force in any State and pending immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of section 100 of this Act; 
(f) the permits issued under sub-section (1A) of section 68F of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 
(4 of 1939), or under the corresponding provision, if any, in force in any State immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to remain in force until the approved scheme under Chapter 
VI of this Act is published. 
(3) Any penalty payable under any of the repealed enactments may be recovered in the manner 
provided by or under this Act, but without prejudice to any action already taken for the recovery of such 
penalty under the repealed enactments. 
(4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general 
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with regard to the effect of 
repeals. 
1[217A. Renewal of permits, driving licences and registration granted under the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1939.—Notwithstanding the repeal by sub-section (1) of section 217 of the enactments referred to in 
that sub-section, any certificate of fitness or registration or licence or permit issued or granted under the 
said enactments may be renewed under this Act.] 
 
 
 
                                                          
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2000, s. 5 (w.e.f. 11-8-2000). 

100 
 
1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE] 
(See sections 116 and 119) 
TRAFFIC SIGNS 
Part A.—Mandatory Signs 
 
 
 
Notes—(1) The figure 20 is given merely as an example. The actual figures will be as prescribed in each case where this sign is used. 
(2) The general design of the post is given for guidance. 
(3) Where the speed limit is, or is to be, imposed only on a certain class or classes of motor vehicle, the class or classes will be specified 
on the “definition plate”. Where in addition to a general speed limit applicable to other motor vehicles a special speed limit is or is to be 
imposed on vehicles of a certain class or classes, the general speed limit will be specified on the disc and the special speed limit together 
with the class or classes of vehicle to which it applies, will be specified on the “definition plate”. 
(4) The paints to be used on the traffic signs should be of reflecting kind.  
                                                          
1. The Schedule renumbered as the First Schedule thereofby Act 54 of 1994, s. 63 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 

101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

102 
 
 
Note.—Sign NO.5 as here set forth may be amplified by instructions inscribed upon a definition plate placed below it as in the general 
arrangement set forth in sign No. 1 of this Part. Upon the definition plate may be set forth the times during which parking is prohibited. 
In like manner an arrow-head inscribed on the definition plate will indicate that parking is prohibited on that part of the street or road 
lying to the side of the sign to which the arrow-head points.  
 
 

103 
 
 

104 
 
Part B.—Cautionary Signs 
The signs of this Part shall be used in conjunction with a red triangular plate, the centre of which shall be either bollow or painted white, in 
the manner indicated in the general design reproduced below. 
 
 
 
 

105 
 
 
 
 

106 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

107 
 
 
 
 
 
 

108 
 
Part C.—Informatory Signs 
 
 
 
 

109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

110 
 
1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See Section 163 A) 
SCHEDULE FOR COMPENSATION FOR THIRD PART FATAL ACCIDENT/INJURY CASES CLAIMS 
 
1. Fatal Accidents: 
 
NOTE: The amount of compensation so arrived at in the case of fatal accident claims shall be reduced by 1 /3rd in consideration of the 
expenses which the victim would have incurred towards maintaining himself had he been alive. 
                                                          
1. 
Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 64 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994). 
Annual Income 
  
Rs. 
3000 
Rs. 
4200 
Rs. 
5400 
Rs. 
6600 
Rs. 
7800 
Rs. 
9000 
Rs. 
10200   
Rs. 
11400   
Rs.  
12000 
Rs. 
18000 
Rs. 
24000 
Rs. 
36000 
Rs. 
40000 
AGE OF VICTIM 
MULTIPLIER                                                  RUPEES IN THOUSANDS 
 
 
compensation in case of death 
  
  
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Rs. 
Up to 15 yrs. 
.....15 
60 
84 
108 
132 
156 
180 
204 
228 
240 
360 
480 
720 
800 
Above 15 yrs. but not exdg. 20 yrs. 
.....16 
57 
79.8 
102 
125.4 
148.2 
171 
193.8 
216.6 
228 
342 
456 
684 
760 
Above 20 yrs. but not exdg. 25 yrs. 
....17 
54 
75.6 
97.2 
118.8 
140.4 
162 
183.6 
205.2 
216 
324 
432 
648 
720 
Above 25 yrs. but not exdg. 30 yrs. 
.....18 
51 
71.4 
91.8 
112.2 
132.6 
153 
173.4 
193.8 
204 
306 
408 
612 
680 
Above 30 yrs. but not exdg. 35 yrs. 
.....17 
50 
67.2 
86.4 
105.6 
124.8 
144 
163.2 
192.4 
192 
288 
384 
576 
640 
Above 35 yrs. but not exdg. 40 yrs. 
.....16 
50 
63 
81 
99 
117 
135 
153 
171 
180 
270 
360 
540 
600 
Above 40 yrs. but not exdg. 45 yrs. 
.....15 
50 
58.8 
75.6 
92.4 
109.2 
126 
142.8 
159.6 
168 
252 
336 
504 
560 
Above 45 yrs. but not exdg. 50 yrs. 
.....13 
50 
50.4 
64.8 
79.2 
93.6 
108 
122.4 
136.8 
144 
216 
286 
432 
480 
Above 50 yrs. but not exdg. 55 yrs. 
.....11 
50 
50 
54 
66 
78 
90 
102 
114 
120 
180 
240 
360 
400 
Above 55 yrs. but not exdg. 60 yrs. 
.......8 
50 
50 
50 
52.8 
62.4 
72 
81.6 
91.2 
96 
114 
192 
286 
320 
Above 60 yrs. but not exdg. 65 yrs. 
.......5 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
54 
61.2 
68.4 
72 
108 
144 
216 
240 
Above 65 yrs. 
.......5 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
50 
51 
57 
60 
90 
120 
180 
200 
2. Amount of compensation shall not be less than Rs. 50,000. 
  
3. General Damages (in case of death): 
  
    The following General Damages shall be payable in addition to compensations outlined above: 
  
    (i) Funeral expenses 
 -- Rs.    2,000/- 
    (ii) Loss of Consortium, if beneficiary is the spouse 
 -- Rs.    5,000/- 
    (iii) Loss of Estate 
 -- Rs.    2,500/- 
     (iv) Medical Expenses—Actual expenses incurred before death supported by bills/vouchers but not 
exceeding 
 -- Rs.  15, 000/- 
4. General Damages in case of Injuries and Disabilities: 
  
     (i) Pain and Sufferings 
  
         (a) Grievous injuries 
 -- Rs.    5,000/- 
         (b) Non-grievous injuries 
 -- Rs.    1,000/- 

111 
 
 
 
 
 
     (ii) Medical Expenses—Actual expenses incurred supported by bills/vouchers but not exceeding 
as one time payment 
 -- Rs.   15,000/- 
5. Disability in non-fatal accidents: 
  
   The following compensation shall be payable in case of disability to the victim arising out of non-
fatal accidents: 
  
   Loss of income, if any, for actual period of disablement not exceeding fifty-two weeks. 
  
   PLUS either of the following:— 
  
    (a) In case of permanent total disablement the amount payable shall be arrived at by multiplying the annual loss of income by the 
Multiplier applicable to the age on the date of determining the compensation, or 
(b) In case of permanent partial disablement such percentage of compensation which would have been payable in the case of permanent 
total disablement as specified under item (a) above. 
Injuries deemed to result in Permanent Total Disablement /Permanent Partial Disablement and percentage of loss of earning capacity shall 
be as per Schedule I under Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. 
6. Notional income for compensation to those who had no income prior to accident:— 
 
Fatal and disability in non-fatal accidents:— 
 
(a) Non-earning persons 
 —Rs. 15,000 p.a. 
(b) Spouse                                                                                                                      
—Rs. l/3rd of income of the 
earning/surviving spouse. 
In case of other injuries only "general damage" as applicable.] 
 

